1865-1868. Song in Soma-räga

1. (Refrain) näcata gaura püraba rase bhora
kanaka dharädhara        garaba bibhaïjana
          jhalakata aìga atanu cita-cora
2. häsata mådu mådu      badana chända chabi
          näçata ghora kaluña ändhiyära
dhara-ite täla      tarala pada-paìkaja
          kampa-i dharaëé saha-i nähi bhära
3. taruëa aruëa-yuga          locana òagamaga
          abirala bipula pulaka-kula säji
garajata saghana         siàha jini bikrama
          balé kali-käla bipula bhaye bhäji
4. bhedata gagana        gäne priya parikara
          bäyata khola lalita karatäla
mätala akhila loka       bhaëa narahari
          bhubana bharala yaça biñada biçäla


     1. (Refrain) Overcome by tasting the nectar of His previous pastimes as Lord Kåñëa, Lord Gaura dances. His glistening limbs, limbs that break the golden mountain’s pride, charm Kämadeva’s heart.
     2. The splendor of His gently gently smiling face destroys the blinding darkness of a host of horrible sins. His rhythmically dancing footsteps make the earth tremble. The earth has no power to hold Him up.
     3. The new red lotus flowers of His eyes always overfloww with tears of ecstatic spiritual love. he hairs of His body stand erect. Eclipsing the lions’ prowess, He roars. Frightened, the powerful age of Kali flees.
     4. Gracefully playing khola and karatälas, His dear companions sing. Their tumultuous music breaks the sky. Now all the worlds are wild with ecstatic spiritual love. Narahari says: Now Lord Gaura’s splendid pure glories fill all the worlds.


1907-1908. Song in Deçapäla-räga

1. nåtyata gauracandra jana-raïjana, nityänanda bipada-bhaya-bhaïjana
kaïja-nayana jiti naba naba khaïjana, cähani manamatha garaba hare
jhalakata duhuà tanu kanaka dharädhara, naöana ghaöana paga dharata dharaëé para
häsa milita mukha layata sudhäkara, ucari bacana janu amiyä jhare
2. çobhä nirupama bhaëatana äyata, beñöita parikara guëa-gaëa gäyata
madhura madhura mådu mardala bäyata, dhädhä dhigi dhigi dhikaöa dhilaìga
gaëa saha sura-gaëa gagana-pantha-gata, ghana ghana sarasa kusuma bara barañata
jaya jaya jaya dhwani bhubana biyäpata, narahari kahaba ki prema-taraìga


     1. Lord Gauracandra, who delights everyone. Lord Nityänanda, weho breaks all fear of any calamity, dances at His side. Their lotus eyes defeat the young young khaïjana birds. Their graceful eyes steal away Kämadeva’s pride. Their forms glisten like two golden mountains. Somehow the earth sustains Their dancing footsteps. The smiling enctyar moons of Theor faces meet. Their words are like flowing streams of sweet nectar.
     2. Their words are glorious without peer. They are surrounded by companions who sing of Their glories. Sweetly sweetly the musical instruments are gently sounded. “Dhädhä dhigi dhigi dhikaöa dhilaìga!”, the drums declare. Assembling in the pathway of the sky, the demigods and their associates shower flowers. Sounds of “Jaya! Jaya! Jaya!” fills the worlds. Will Narahari ever be able to describe the waves of ecstatic spiritual love that flooded everything at that time?



1921-1928. Song in Dhänaçé-räga


1. (Refrain) näce çacéra duläla raìge
adwaita nitä-i gadädhara çrébäsädi parikara saìge
2. aìga-bhaìgé ki madhura-chände
pada-bhare mahé-kare öhalamala, ke tähe dhairaja bändhe
3. nänä täle diyä karatäli
gobinda mädhaba bäsu yaça gäya caudike çobhaye bhäli 
4. gorä canda-mukhe hari bole
jagä-i mädhä-i heri bähu prasäri karaye kole
5. goräcandera paraça päïä
jagä-i mädhä-i näce bhuja tuli bhäbete bibhola haiïä
6. dohe loöäya dharaëé-tale
kämpe tanu anupama pulakita titaye äìkhera jale
7. gorä-karuëä prakäça dekhi
näce sura-gaëa gaganete rahi saghane juòäya äìkhi
8. ke nä dhäya se karuëä-äçe
jaya jaya dhwani abané bharala bhaëe ghanaçyäma-däse


     1. (Refrain) Surrounded by Lord Advaita, Lord Nitäi, Gadädhara, Çréväsa and a host of other associates, Çacé’s son dances.
     2. His limbs move with gracedful sweetness. His restless dancing feet touch the surface of the earth. Who is peaceful and quiet now?
     3. The karatälas play many different rhythms. Govinda, Mädhava, and Väsu sing the Lord’s glories. The four directions are filled with glory.
     4. From the moon of Lord Gaura’s mouth come calls of “Hari!”  Seeing Jagäi and Mädhäi, Lord Gaura hugs them in His arms.
     5. By Lord Gauracandra’s touch, Jagäi and Mädhäi are filled with ecstatic spiritual love. Raising their arms, they dance. 
     6. Then they roll on the ground. They tremble. The hairs of their bodies stand erect. Tears stream from their eyes.
     7. Seeing what Lord Gaura’s mercy has brought, the demigods dance in the sky. Their eyes are filled with cooling bliss.
     8. Who will not run to get Lord Gaura’s mercy? The whole world is filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” This Ghanaçyäma däsa says.


1945-1948. Song in Beläbalé-räga

1. (Refrain) näcata gauracandra naöa-bhüpa
manamatha läkha garaba-bhara-bhaïjana, akhila-bhubana-jana-raïjana rüpa
2. abirata atula bhäba-bhare gara gara, garajata ati adabhuta ruci-käré
maìgalamaya pada dharata dharaëé para, karata bhaìgé bhuja-yugala pasäri
3. häsata madhura adhara mådu labaëi, çarada-cända jini, badana biläsa
öalamala aruëa kamala-dala-locana, kauna karaha kata rasa parakäça
4. gäyata madhura bhakata-gaëa naba naba, kinnara-nikara darapa karu cüra
uthalala prema-sindhu mahé bhäsala, narahari kumati paraça rahu düra


     1. (Refrain) Lord Gauracandra, the king of dancers, dances. His graceful form delights the hearts of all the worlds. He breaks into pieces the pride of millions of Kämadevas.
     2. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, He roars. He is wonderfully splendid and gloroous. The earth now holds up His auspicious feet. His long arms are graceful.
     3. The smile on His lips is sweet and graceful. His glorious face defeats the autumn moon. His red-lotus-petal eyes are restless. How much nectar of ecstatic spiritual love shines in them?
     4. The devotees sing newer and newer sweet songs, songs that rob the Kinnaras of their pride. The ocean of ecstatic spiritual love now floods all the worlds. Everyone floats in that ocean. Only wicked-hearted Narahari does not float. That ocean never touched him. It stayed far away.


1964-1967. Song in Ghaëöäraba-räga

1. näcata gaura nikhila naöa-paëòita nirupama bhaìgé madana-mada hara-i
pracura caëòakara-darapari-bhaïjana, aìga-kiraëe diga-bidiga ujara-i
2. unamata atula siàha jini garajana, çuna-i balé kali-bäraëa òara-i
ghana ghana lampha lalita ati caïcala, caraëa-ghäte kñiti öalamala kara-i
3. kinnara garaba kharaba karu parikara, gäya ulase amiya raba jhara-i
bäyata bahu-bidha khola khamaka dhuni, paraçata gagana kauna dhåti dhara-i
4. atula pratäpa kämpi durajana-gaëa, leya-i çaraëa caraëa-tale paòa-i
narahari pahuìka kériti rahu jaga-bhara, parama dulaha dhana niyata bitara-i


     1. Lord Gaura, the most learned paëòita of dancing, garcefully dances with peerless movements that take away Kämadeva’s pride. The effulgence of Lord Gaura’s limbs, an effulgence that breaks the sun’s pride into pieces, fills the directions with light.
     2. His roar defeats the peerless wildly angry lions. Hearing that roar, powerful Kali-yuga is stunned with fear. In His restless dancing He leaps again and again. The weight of His steps makes the earth tremble.
     3. His companions jopyfully sing songs like nectar, songs that shrink the Kinnaras’ pride. The khola and khamaka drums sweetly sound in many ways. Their sweet sounds touch the sky. Why can stay peaceful and unmoved?
     4. Trembling in fear, the powerful demons take shelter of Lord Gaura’s feet. Narahari’s master fills the worlds with the sound of kértana. The most rare treasure He freely gives to this world as a gift.

2437-2440. Song in Mäyüra-räga

1. bhäbe gara gara       nitä-i sundara
          heri goräcändera chaöä
kata uöhe cite      näre thira haite
          prati aìge naba pülaka ghaöä
2. kibä unamäda          kñaëe siàha-näda
          kñaëe loöe dharä-tale
kñaëe dérgha-çwäsa       kñaëe mahä-häsa
          khase bäsa bhäse äìkhera jale
3. kñaëe joòa lampha          kñaëe dehe kampa
          khene yäya keha keha dharite näre
kñaëe kibä kaiyä         bahe théra haiyä
          sämä-iyä biçwambhera kore
4. nityänanda kole       laiyä netra-jale
          bhäse kibä prabhu premera réti
kahe narahari       çrébäsädi cäri
          päçe kände keha nä dhare dhåti


     1. Glancing at the moonlight of Lord Gauracandra’s splendor, glorious Lord Nitäi is overcome with spiritual bliss. How much ecstasy rises within His heart? He cannot stay still. The hairs stand up on His every limb.
     2. He  has become wild in the ecstasy of spiritual love. One moment He roars like a lion. The next moment He rolls on the ground. The next moment He lets out a long sigh. The next moment He loudly laughs. The next moment His clothing is in disarray. The next moment He floats in the tears that stream from His eyes. 
     3. The next moment He leaps. The next moment His body trembles. The next moment He bexcomes wild and no one can restrain Him. The next moment He is quiet and peaceful. The next moment He hugs Lord Viçvambhara.
     4. Hugging Viçvambhara, Lord Nitäi makes Them both float in the tears streaming from His eyes. These are the ways of Lord Nitäi’s ecstasy of spiritual love. Narahari says: The four brothers headed by Çréväsa stand there and weep. None of them can remain peaceful.



2761-2764. Song in Debakiri-räga

1. bali-kali-matta-mataìgaja-maradana, gaura-siàha näcata nadéyäya
jaya jaya raba saba bhubana biyäpita, nikhila loka mili caudhike dhäya
2. gäyata parama prabala priya parikara, kinnara duragama täla taraìga
bäjata muraja mådaìga dåmiki dåmi dändä drimikaöa dhikaöa dhilaìga
3. kampa-i dharaëé dharata pada-paìkaja, òagamagi aìga-bhaìgé anupäma
locana taru aruëa ruci ganja-i, cähani cäru camake kata käma
4. çaçadhara-nikara nindi mukha madhurima, häsata lahu lahu amiïä ugäri
prema bitari narahari pahuà pämare, kara-i kore bhuja-yuga pasäri


     1. Crushing the powerful wild elephant of Kali-yuga, Nadéyä’s lion of Lord Gaura dances. Sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” fill the worlds. From the four directions everyone runs to Him.
     2. Lord Gaura sings with His dear companions. Waves of rhythms, rhythms even the Kinnaras cannot play, flow. “Dåmiki dåmi dändä drimikaöa dhikaöa dhilaìga!”, the murajas and mådaìgas declare.
     3. With the touch of Lord Gaura’s lotus feet, the earth trembles. Lord Gaura’s body moves with peerless grace. He is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Gazing at His glorious reddish eyes, how many Kämadevas are filled with wonder?
     4. His charming face rebukes a host of moons. His gentle gentle smiles are flowing streams of nectar. To the fallen sinners Narahari’s master gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. With His arms He hugs them.

2765-2768. Song in Megha-mallära-räga


1. (Refrain) näcata gaura naöana paëòita-bara
kuìkuma-däminé-däma-damana tanu, maëòita nirupama bipula pulaka-bhara
2. aruëa adhara mådu cända-badana lasa, daçana kunda lahu häsa amiyä jhara
nayana-khaïja jana-raïjana rasamaya, cähani kata çata madana-garaba-hara
3. kanaka-måëäla-nindi bhuja-yuga tuli, bolata hari hari antara gara gara
maìgalamaya komala su-lalita pada, bibidha bhaìgé säïe dharaye dharaëé-para
4. bäja jhaïjha su-khamaka khola kata, gäyata madhura madhura sura-parikara
bitarata prema-ratana dhana jaga-bhari, baïcita ku-mati e narahari pämara 


     1. (Refrain) Lord Gaura, the great paëòita of dancing, dances. His form eclipses the splendor of kuìkuma and lightning. His peerless ornament is the hairs of His body standing erect in ecstasy.
     2. His lips are red. The moon of His graceful face glistens. His teeth are jasmine flowers. His gentle smile is a cascading stream of nectar. His nectar-filled lotus eyes delight the people. From how many hundreds of Kämadevas does He remove the pride?
     3. He raises His two arms, arms that rebuke the golden lotus stems. He chants, “Hari! Hari!” His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. His soft and graceful feet are filled with all auspiciousness. Serving in many ways, the earth upholds His feet.
     4. How many rhythms do the kholas and khamakas play? The Lord’s divine associates sing sweet sweet songs. Lord Gaura freely gives the world the precious gift of ecstatic spiritual world. He fills the world with that gift. Only the wicked-hearted wretch Narahari did not receive that gift. Only he was cheated.



2773-2776. Song in Naöa-Näräyaëa-räga

1. (Refrain) näcata gaura parama sukha-sadanä
abirala bipula pulaka kula jhalamala, su-lalita aìga madana-mada-kadanä
2. öalamala amala kamala-dala-locana, cähani karuëä aruëa-ruci rucire
nirasi çarada-çaçé häsite lapana lasa, daçana su-cikaëa hara cita acire
3. gaja-bara-garaba-haraëa gati naba naba, dhara-ite caraëa dharaëé ati muditä
gada gada hådaya badata ghana hari hari, nirupama bhäba bibhaba bhara uditä
4. unamata atula ratana-dhana-bitaraëe, harala bipada yaça bharala e bhubane
pürila sakala manoratha ithe baïcita, narahari biphala janama dhika jébane


     1. (Refrain) Lord Gaura, the abode of all bliss, dances. The hairs of His body stand erect. His graceful effulgent form crushes Kämadeva’s pride.
     2. With glistening reddish lotus-petal eyes He casts glances of mercy. His smiling face eclipses the autumn moon. His words are glorious. His splendid teeth charm the heart.
     3. His graceful motion rob the graceful epelahnts of their pride. The earth feels newer and newer bliss to be able to uphold His feet. His heart overcome with ecstatic spireitual love, He says, “Hari! Hari!” in a choked voice. He manifests the symptoms of ecstasy.
     4. Wild with bliss, He freely gives away the precious jewels of spiritual love. He removes all calamities. The worlds are filled with His glories. He fulfills everyone’s desire. Only Narahari’s desire is not fulfilled. Narahari’s birth and life in this world is fruitless and pathetic. 


2779-2782. Song in Naöa-räga

1. näcata çacé-tanaya gaura-mädhuré mana mohe
kanakäcala dalana dehe pulakäbalé çobhe
2. jhalamala bidhu-badana amiyä barañata mådu-häse
caïcala nayanäïcale kata kata rasa parakäçe
3. pada-tale dharu täla jhanana, nüpura ghana bäje
abhinaba bahu bhaìgé nirakhi, manamatha maru läje
4. gäyata guëa jaga-jana nimagana sukha prabähe
baïcita narahari déna-héna, dahe bhaba-daba-dähe


     1. Çacé’s charming fair son dances. He charms every heart. His form eclipses the golden mountain’s splendor. The hairs of His body stand erect.
     2. The effulgent moon of His gently smiling face showers nectar. How much glistening nectar flows from the corners of His restless eyes?
     3. The soles of His feet mark the rhythms in the dance. His anklets jangle. Seeing His ever-new graceful motions, Kämadeva is ashamed.
     4. Plunged in a flowing river of bliss, the people of the world sing His glories. Narahari has been cheated of singing those glories. Poor wretched Narahari burns in the flames of repeated birth and death.


2783-2790. Song in Naöé-räga

1. kibä khola karatäla bäje
cäri päçe parikara säje
2. äju gäyata madhura lélä
çuni darabaye däru-çilä
3. (refrain) raìge näcaye sundara gorä
ke bä jäne ki bä bhäbe bhora
4. naba pulaka-balita tanu
çohe kanaka-panaça janu
5. surasarita-prabäha pärä
duöé nayane bahaye dhärä
6. ghana ghana bhuja-yuga tuli
garajaye hari hari bali
7. ati patita pämare heri
dhari kore kare beri beri
8. prema-dhana de-i jane jane
chäòi eka narahari déne


     1. The kholas and karatälas sound. The Lord’s associates are on all four sides.
     2. Now the devotees sing sweet songs of the Lord’s pastimes. Hearing these songs even the stones and dry wood melt in ecstasy.
     3. (Refrain) Handsome Lord Gaura dances in the dancing-circle. What ecstasy fills Him? Who can know?
     4. The hairs of His body stand erect. His body glistens like gold.
     5. From His eyes flow a flooding Gaìgä of tears.
     6. Raising His arms, He roars, “Hari! Hari!”
     7. Seeing a fallen sinner, He hugs him again and again.
     8. To person after person He gives the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. Only to poor Narahari He does not give that treasure.


2795-2800. Song in Baräöi-räga or Dhänaçé-räga

1. bhubana-mohana goräcända
akhila lokera mano-phända
2. näce pahuà premera äbeçe
aruëa-nayana jale bhäse
3. bhuja tuli hari hari bole
patita dhariyä kare kole
4. nija rase sabhäya bhäsäya
cäri päçe päriñada gäya
5. su-komala aìga ächäòiyä
gaòi yäya dhuläya paòiyä
6. dekhi sakala jéba kände
narahari hiyä nähi bändhe


     1. Lord Gauracandra charms all the worlds. He is a trap set to catch every heart.
     2. Overcome with ecstatic spiritual love, Lord Gaura dances. He floats in the tears that stream from His reddened eyes.
     3. Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari! Hari!” He hugs the fallen souls.
     4. He floats in the nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Around Him on four sides, His associates sing.
     5. He stumbles. His delicate body falls to the dust.
     6. Seeing this, every living being weeps. Narahari’s heart cannot contain it’s grief.



3381-3386. Song in Kämoda-räga


1. (refrain) çacéra duläla gorä näce
debera durlabha dhana yäre täre yäce
2. patitere hariyä dharite näre aìga
kñaëe kñaëe uöhe kata bhäbera taraìga
3. jhalamala karaye kanaka jini äbhä
bipula pulakäbalé balita ki çobhä
4. bhäsaye çré-mukha buka nayanera jale
duöé bähu tuliyä saghana hari bole
5. unamata bhakata phiraye cäri päçe
jaya jaya kala-raba e bhümi äkäçe
6. pahuà päne heri keha dhairaja nä bändhe
narahari o räìgä caraëe paòi kände


     1. (Refrain) Lord Gaura, who is Çacé’s son, dances. He begs everyone to please accept the gift He gives, a gift even the demigods cannot attain.
     2. Seeing a fallen sinner, He hugs his body. Moment after moment how many waves of ecstatic spiritual love arise within Him?
     3. His effulgent form defeats the splendor of gold. How glorious is His form, its hairs standing up with bliss! 
     4. His graceful face and chest float in a flood of tears from His eyes. Raising His arms, He calls out, “Hari!”
     5. Wild with bliss, the devotees dance at His four sides. The earth and sky are filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!”
     6. Seeing Lord Gaura, no one can remain peaceful. Falling before Lord Gaura’s reddish feet, Narahari weeps.


3387-3390. Song in Kämoda-räga

1. näce gorä guëa-maëi        kebala premera khani
          priya parikara cäri päça
çobhä aparüpa yena       uòü gaëa mäjhe yena
          kanaka candramä parakäça
2. çiréña kusuma jini         su-komala tanu-khäni
          pulaka balita manohara
praphulla kamala düre         badane madana jhure
          häsi mäkhä aruëa adhara
3. kata nä bhaìgimä kari      bhuja tuli bole hari
          bariña amiyä anibära
ati sa-karuëa hiyä       patitere nirakhiyä
          äìkhi bahe suradhuné dhära
4. bäje khola karatäla        calana cälani bhäla
          dekhi ke bä nä haya mohita
nä rahila dukha çoka          mätila sakala loka
          narahari e sukha baïcita


     1. Lord Gaura, who has the jewels of all virtues, dances. He is a jewel-mine filled with the jewels of ecstatic spiritual love. Around Him on four sides are His dear companions. His glory is wonderful. He is like a golden moon surrounded by a host of stars.
     2. His delicate form defeats the çiréña flower. His bodily hairs stand erect. His form charms every heart. He makes the blossoming lotus flowers’ pride flee far away. His smiling face and reddish lips make Kämadeva feel humble and unworthy. 
     3. How many graceful movements does He not manifest as He dances? Raising His arms, He chants, “Hari!” Without stop He showers a great monsoon of nectar. His heart is filled with compassion. When He sees a fallen sinner, a flooding Gaìgä of compassionate tears streams from His eyes.
     4. The kholas and karatälas sound. Lord Gaura gracefully dances as He walks. Seeing Him, who would not become enchanted? Everyone is now wild with bliss. Sadness and suffering do not stay with anyone now. Alas! Narahari was somehow cheated of all that bliss.


3391-3396. Song in Megha-räga

1. gorä baòa dayära öhäkura
saìkértana-meghe prema bariñe pracura
2. parikara mäjhe säje bhäla
aparüpa rüpete bhubana kare älo
3. näcaye kata nä bhaìgé kari
kebä bä dharibe hiyä se mädhuré heri
4. bäye karatäla mådaìga
gäya-e madhura géta amiyä taraìga
5. keha häse keha keha kände
bhüme gaòi yäya keha thire nähi bändhe
6. jaya-dhwani e bhümi äkäça
mätila pämara héna narahari däsa


     1. Supremely merciful Lord Gaura now makes the clouds of saìkértana shower a great monsoon of ecstatic spiritual love.
     2. In the center of a host of associates, He is glorious. Hiw wonderful form fills all the worlds with light.
     3. How many graceful motions does He manifest as He dances? Seeing His graceful dancing, what person can keep his heart peaceful?
     4. Karatälas and mådaìgas sound. Sweet songs are sung, songs like waves of nectar.
     5. Someone laughs. Another weeps. Another falls to the ground. No one is peaceful.
     6. The earth and sky are filled with sounds of, “Jaya!” Even the fallen wretch Narahari däsa is wild with bliss.


3430-3435. Song in Suha-i-räga

1. näcata naöa-bara gaura-kiçora
abhinaba bhaìgé bhubana karu bhora
2. jhalamala aìga-kiraëa anupäma
hera-ite mürachata kata kata käma
3. öalamala locana-yugala biçäla
dolate kaëöhe balita bana-mäla
4. jharata amiyä bidhu-baraëa ujora
péba-i nayana bhari bhakata-cakora
5. ghana ghana bolaye madhura hari-näma
çuna-ite ko na roya-i abiräma
6. pämara patita prema-rase mäti
nä darabe kaöhina e narahari chäti


     1. Lord Gaura-kiçora, the best of dancers, dances. His graceful new movements make the worlds wild with bliss.
     2. Seeing the peerless splendor of His glistening limbs, How many Kämadevas are overcome with enchantment?
     3. His large eyes are restless. His forest-garland sways to and fro on His chest.
     4. With their eyes the cakora-bird devotees sip the nectar effulgence of the glistening moon of Lord Gaura.
     5. Sweetly Lord Gaura sings Lord Hari’s holy names. Hearing Him, who will not weep without stop? 
     6. The fallen sinners have now become wild by tasting the sweet nectar of ecstatic spiritual love. Alas! Narahari’s hard heart does not melt in the ecstasy of spiritual love.

3632-3635. Song in Dhänaçé-räga

1. gorä-preme gara gara nitä-i ämära
aruëa-nayane bahe suradhuné-dhära
2. bipula-pulakäbalé çohe pahuà gäya
gajendra-gamane heli duli cali yäya
3. patitere nirakhiyä du-bähu pasäri
kole kari saghane bolaya hari hari
4. emana dayära nidhi ke ha-ibe ära
narahari adhama tarite abatära


     1. My Lord Nitäi is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Caitanya. From Lord Nitäi’s reddened eyes flows a celestial Gaìgä of tears.
     2. The hairs of His body stand erect. Swaying to and fro, He walks like the king of elephants.
     3. Seeing a fallen sinner, He extends His two arms, hugs the sinner, and begs, “Chant, `Hari! Hari!’ “
     4. Lord Nitäi is an ocean of mercy. How could it be otherwise. After all, He descended to this world to deliver the fallen sinner Narahari.

3658-3661. Song in Açäbaré-räga

1. (Refrain) äju änande nitä-i-cände
çobhamaya siàhä-         sane basä-iyä
          keha nä dhairaja bändhe
2. su-bäsita gaìgä-jala laiyä
paòi mantra mäthe        òhale jala
          dämodara harañita haiyä
3. jaya jaya dhwani kari
mänuña misäïä        sura-gaëa çobhä
          nirakhe nayana bhari
4. keha gäya abhiñeka raìge
pä-iyä çuñka-       bäsa narahari
          candana de-i se aìge


     1. (Refrain) Now Lord Nitäicandra joyfully sits on the lion-throne. He is handsome and glorious. Now no one is peaceful.
     2. Chanting mantras, joyful Dämodara pours scented Gaìgä water on the Lord’s head.
     3. There is a great tumult of “Jaya! Jaya!” Mingling amongst the humans, the demigods gaze at the Lord’s glory. They fill their eyes with the sight of Him.
     4. Someone sings. The abhiñeka is gloriously performed. I, Narahari däsa, bring dry garemnts. I anoint Lord Nitäicandra’s limbs with sandal paste.

3680-3687. Song in Dhänaçé-räga


1. bhubana-päbana nitä-i mora
nä jäni ki bhäbe sadä-i bhora
2. gorä gorä bali du-bähu tuli
matta-gaja yena calaye òhuli
3. kaëöhe jhalamala mälaté-mälä
parisara buke karaye khelä
4. su-lalita-mukhe madhura häsi
cände òhale yena amiïä-räçi
5. öalamala jala järuëa äìkhi
se cähani cäru karuëä mäkhi
6. bäreka se äìkhe dekhaye yäre
premera päthäre bhäsaya täre
7. déna-héna duùkhé kichu nä bäche
hena prema-dätä ke ära äche
8. narahari hena prabhu nä bhaji
biñaya-biçeñe rahila maji


     1. My Lord Nitäi purifies all the worlds. How is He always overcome with the ecstasy of spiritual love? I do not know.
     2. Raising His arms, He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” Liek an intoxicated elephant, He sways to and fro.
     3. On His neck glistens a jasmine garland, a garland that playfully rests on His chest.
     4. On His graceful playful face is a gentle smile. From the moon of His face flows a flood of nectar.
     5. Tears stream from His eyes. His glance is filled with mercy.
     6. Any person who once sees Him with his own eyes floats in an ocean of ecstatic spiritual love.
     7. He does not consider who is poor, or fallen, or troubled. Who is not like that? To every person He gives the gift of ecstatic spiritual love.
     8. Alas! Narahari däsa did not worship Lord Nitäi. That is why Narahari däsa is now plunged in materialistic life.


3698-3701. Song in Dhänaçé-räga

1. nitä-i guëa-nidhi          çobhära abadhi
          ki sudhäya bidhi gaòila sädhe
prabhätera bhänu         jini tanu-chaöä
          heriyä kemana dhairaja bändhe
2. äjänu-lambita         bhuja bhujaìgama
          bhaìgé nirupama raìgete bhäsi
badana çarada-      bidhu-ghaöä ghana
          bariñaye sudhä éñat häsi
3. gorä gorä bali        gara gara hiyä
          heli duli cale kuïjara pärä
öalamala jala-      järuëa-locana
          jhara jhara jhare änanda-dhärä
4. sura-nara-gaëa       dhäya cäri-päçe
          se dulaha pada paraça-äçe
däsa narahari       pahuà paratäpe
          balé kali-käla kämpaye träse


     1. Lord Nitäi is a treasure-house of virtues. He stands at the apex of glory and handsomeness. What nectar flows from Him! The effulgence of His form defeats the rising sun. After seeing Him, how can anyone remain still and peaceful?
     2. His arms are like snaks reaching to His knees. He floats in playful gracefulness, gracefulness without peer. His face is like the autumn moon. His gentle smile showers nectar.
     3. He chants, “Gaura! Gaura!” His heart is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Swaying to and fro, He walks like an intoxicated elephant. From His eyes stream tears, tears like flooding rivers of spiritual bliss.
     4. Yearning to touch His feet, feet found only with great difficulty, the demigods and humans run from the four directions. Aha! The invicible power of Narahari däsa’s master makes strong Kali-yuga tremble in fear.


3706-3711. Song in Kämoda-räga


1. nitä-i karuëä-nidhi
äni milä-ila bidhi
2. déna-héna dukhé jane
dhané kaila prema-dhane
3. priya-parikara saìge
näciyä bulaya raìge
4. nä jäni ki preme mäti
nä jäne dibasa räti
5. gorä gorä bali kände
tile nä dhairaja bändhe
6. dhüli dhüsarita dehä
tä heri ke dhare thehä
7. guëe kebä nähi jhure
eka narahari düre


     1. Lord Nitäi is an ocean of mercy. The rules of religion rest in Him.
     2. To the poor, fallen, unhappy people He gives the treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. He makes them wealthy in that treasure.
     3. Surrounded by His dear associates, He dances in the dancing-circle.
     4. How has He become intoxicated with ecstatic spiritual love? I do not know. He does not know if it is day or night.
     5. Chanting, “Gaura! Gaura!”, He weeps. Not a single sesame seed’s worth of peaceful restraint remains within Him.
     6. His body is covered with dust. Seeing Him, who can remain peaceful?
     7. Seeing His glories, who will not weep in ecstasy? Alas! Only Narahari däsa stays far away from that ecstasy.


3712-3717. Song in Dhänaçé-räga

1. gorä-preme mätiyä nitä-i
jagata mätäya sa-karuëa diöhe ca-i
2. näcaye äjänu bähu tuli
patitera kolete paòaye òhuli òhuli
3. kata sukhe hiyä nä uthale
mukha buka bhäsi yäya nayanera jale
4. prati aìge pulakera ghaöä
madana mürachi paòe dekhi rüpa-chaöä
5. su-cända-badane mådu häsi
kahite madhura kathä òhäle sudhä-räçi
6. ki naba bhaìgimä räìgä päya
narahari paräëa majila mene täya


     1. Intoxicated by the ecstasy of spiritual love for Lord Gaura, with a merciful glance Lord Nitäi now makes the whole world also intoxicated with that ecstasy.
     2. Raising His arms, arms that reach to His knees, Lord Nitäi dances. Hu hugs the fallen souls. He sways to and fro. Overcome with ecstatic love, he falls to the ground.
     3. How much spiritual bliss floods His heart? That bliss takes the form of tears, tears that flow down His face and chest. He floats in those tears.
     4. The hairs on His every limbs stand erect. Seeing the glory of His spiritual form, Kämadeva falls unconscious.
     5. A gentle smile rests on His moonlike face. His sweet words are like a flood of nectar.
     6. How glorious are His ever-new graceful reddish feet! To Lord Nitäi’s feet Narahari däsa dedicates His every breath.




3731-3734. Song in Gändhära-räga

1. (Refrain) jaya jaya padmäbaté-suta sundara
          nityänanda guëa-bhüpa
jaga-jana nayana         täpa bhara bhaïjana
          jini kaëä käruëa aparüpa rüpa
2. çaçadhara-nikara-darapa-hara änana
          jhalakata amiyä jharata mådu häsa
gaura prema-bhare        gara gara antara
          nirupama naba naba bacana biläsa
3. öalamala amala-kamala-locana
          jala girata janu nirata suradhuné dhära
pulaka kadamba-balita su-lalita ati
          parisara bakñe tarala maëi-hära
4. kuïjara damana gamana mano-raïjana
          bähu pasäri athira abiräma
patita kole kari bitare se-dhana
          baïcita jagate duùkhita ghanaçyäma


     1. (Refrain) Glory, glory to Lord Nityänanda. He is Padmävaté’s son. He is handsome and graceful. He is the king of virtues. He breaks apart the burning sufferings in the eyes of the world’s people. His wonderful form eclipses even kaëä käruëa.
     2. His face robs away the pride of a host of moons. His smile is filled with drops of nectar. His heart is overcome with ecstatic love for Lord Gaura. His newer and newer playful words have no peer.
     3. His eyes are splendid lotus flowers that sway to and fro. His tears are a flooding Gaìgä. His bodily hairs standing erect are kadamba filaments. Heis graceful and playful and charming. A jewel necklace sways to and fro on His chest. 
     4. His graceful gestures defeat the graceful elephants. He delights the heart. His arms are long. He is always restless and unsteady. He hugs the fallen souls. He gives them a great treasure. In all the world only sad Ghanaçyäma däsa did not receive that gift. Only he was cheated.

3953-3956. Song in Beläbalé-räga or Maìgala-räga

1. äju çubha-kñaëe       nitä-i-cändera
          adhibäse kibä çobhära ghaöä
nirupama beçe       biläsaye bhäle
          jhalamala kare aìgera chaöä
2. kata çata mana-       matha-mada-hare
          häsi niçä-mukha candramä cäru
kaïja-dala-dali          lalita locana
          cähani nä räkhe dhairaja käru
3. cäri-päçe bipra       beda uccaräye
          cäru-bhaìgé heri haraña hiyä
näré-gaëa-mana      uthale ulase
          ghana ghana ulu lululu diyä
4. nänä bädya-dhwani          bhedaye gagana
          näce nartaka ki madhura gati
jaya jaya rabe      bharaye bhubana
          bhaëe ghanaçyäma kautuka ati


     1. At this auspicious moment Lord Nitäicandra’s adhivasa ritual is splendid and glorious. Lord Nitäi’s garments are peerless. His forehead is graceful and splendid. His limbs glisten with glory.
     2. Glistening in the night, the moon of Lord Nitäi’s face robs away the pride of how many hundreds of Kämadevas? His graceful playful eyes, eyes like lotus petals, cast many graceful glances. He cannot remain peaceful.
     3. Around Him on four sides, the brähmaëas chant the Vedas. gazing at Lord Nitäi’s graceful form, they feel great bliss in their hearts. Their hearts flooded with bliss, the ladies warble, “Ulu-lululu!”
     4. Many musical instruments play tumultuous music that breaks the sky. The dancers dance. How sweet are their movements! The whole world is filled with sounds of “Jaya! Jaya!” Joyful Ghanaçyäma dasa speaks these words.

3965-3968. Song in Bhüpälé-räga

1. basudhä jähnabä debé çobhä-bidhi, adhibäsa-bhüña-bhüñita tanu
jhalamala kare cäru ruci chaöä, taòita kuìkuma ketaké janu
2. cäri-päçe bipra-gaëa dhanya mane, cähi kanyä-päne haraña-hiyä
beda-dhwani kari kare äçirbäda, dhänya dürbä duhuà mastake diyä
3. paëòita-gharaëé dharaëéte pada, nä dharaya hiyä dhairaja bändhe
bibidha maìgala karu sakhé-kula, ulu lulu de-i kata nä sädhe
4. çaìkha ghaëöä ädi bädya bäje bahu, kolähala nähi tulanä dite
bhaëe narahari sura-näré alakhita dekhe kata kautuka cite


     1. Their forms decorated with ornaments for the adhiväsa, the goddesses Vasudhä and Jähnavä shine with great splendor. They glisten with great beauty. They glisten like lightning, or kuìkuma, or ketaké flowers.
     2. From the four directions brahmanas offer blessing. With joyful hearts, they glance at the the two girls. They chant the Vedas. They speak words of blessing. With auspicious dürvä grass they touch the two girls’ heads.
     3. Although their feet peacefully rest upon the ground, the paëòitas’ wives find they cannot keep their hearts at all peaceful and still. The girls all offer auspicious blessings. “Ulu-lulu!”, they warble. How many desires fill their hearts?
     4. Conchshells, bells, and a host of musical instruments sound. A tumult arises, a tumult without equal. Narahari däsa says: How many demigoddesses came and, unnoticed by the others, with joyful hearts watched all of this?

3973-3976. Song in Deçapäla-räga

1. koöi manamatha-garabha-bhara-hara parama sughara nitä-i haladhara
karata gamana caòi naba caudale chabi chala chalakaye
beça biraci bibäha mata kata, bhänti bhüñaëa aìge bilasata
lalita locana-khaïja mukha mådu-häsa maïjula jhalakaye
2. rüpa pibä-ite matta atiçaya, karata bhüsura-bånda jaya jaya
bandé-gaëa-mana-modita ghana ghana bimala yaça parakäçaye
teji nija nija geha dhäyata, näré-purukha nameha päyata
nirakhi rahu cahu ora nimikhana-daraça-rasa-sukhe bhäsaye
3. gäna karu guëé täla-çruti sura, räga mürachana gräma-sumadhura
naöata nartaka ughaöita kataka thaitä thai thai nini ni na
bädya bädaka ba-oye bahutara, täla prakaöa nä hota paöatara thoìkå na na na na thunga thuìkäta dhodhilaìga dhiki dhiki ninä
4. dépa-damake asaìkhya kñiti-para, dibasa saba bhela rajané ujora
bipula kala-kala-dhwani-nirata saba loka gati-patha çohaye
gagana-gata lakhi deba alakhita, sa-rasa barañata kusuma pulakita
däsa narahari pahuka atula biläsa jaga-mana mohaye


     1. Lord Balaräma has nowe become glorious lord Nitäi, Lord Nitäi who robs many millions of Kämadevas of all their pride. He rides in a palanquin. He shines with great splendor. How many glorious gasrments dopes He wear for His wedding? Many ornaments glisten on His body. His eyes are graceful playful lotus flowers. His smile is gentle. He is graceful and glorous.
     2. Drinking the nectar of the sight of his glorious form, the brähmaëas become wild with bliss. “Jaya! Jaya!”, tbey chant. With joyful hearts the poets recite poems describing the Lord’s pure and splendid glories. Men and women run from their homes. They bow down before Lord Nitäi’s feet. With unblinking eyes they gaze at Lord Nitäi. Now they float in the nectar of bliss. 
     3. Singers sing songsa with graceful rhythms and melodies, sweet songs that charm the heart.  Beating out the rhythms, “Thaitä thai thai nini ni na!”, how many dances do the dancers dance? Many musical instruments sound. “Thoìkå na na na na thunga thuìkäta dhodhilaìga dhiki dhiki ninä!”, they declare. Never have there been such graceful rhythms.
     4. Numberless lamps light the night, make it glisten like day. Sweet sounds are everywhere. Traveling on the pathways, the people are splendid and glorious. Unseen, the demigods watch from the sky. They shower a sweet rain of flowers. The master of Narahari däsa enjoys peerless pastimes, pastimes that charm the peoples’ hearts.

4018-4021. Song in Kämoda-räga

1. prabhu nityänanda räma          rüpe guëe anupäma
          padmäbaté-garbhe janamila
nija gaëa la-iyä saìge        dwädaça batsara raìge
          çré-ekacakräya biläsiyä
2. gora abatérëa haile        sannyäséra saìga chale
          bähira ha-ila ghara haite
tértha paryaöana kare         biàçati barñera pare
          änande ä-ila nadéyäte
3. päïä präëa goräcände         paòi se premera phände
          daëòa kamaëòalu phele düre
sadä mati saìkértane          kñetre cale prabhu sane
          prabhu daëòa tina-khaëòa kare
4. prabhura ädeça mate        gauòe äsi kñetra haite
          prabhu-mano-hita karma haila
däsa narahari gati       basu jähnabära pati
          yäre täre prema bilä-ila


     1. Lord Nityänanda Räma, whose virtues and handsomeness are without peer, took birth from Padmävaté’s womb. For twelve years, He enjoyed pastimes of playing with His childhood friends in the village of Ekacakra.
     2. When Lord Gaura descended to this world, Lord Nityänanda, on the pretext of accompanying a sannyäsé, left home. He traveled to many holy places. Then, after twenty years, He joyfully entered Nadéyä.
     3. Lord Gauracandra was His very life. He fell into the trap Lored Gauracandra had set, the trap of ecstatic spiritual love. The daëòa and kamaëòalu He threw far away. His heart was always in saìkértana. He accompanied Lord Gauracandra on the journey to Jagannätha-kñetra. Lord Gauracandra’s daëòa He broke in three.
     4. On Lord Gauracandra’s command He left Jagannätha-kñetra and returned to Gauòa-deça. He strove to satisfy the desire in Lord Gauracandra’s heart. He freely gave away the gift of ecstatic spiritual love. He is Jähnavä’s and Vasudhä’s husband and Narahari däsa’s shelter.


Song 3 (Beloyära-räga)
&

1. dekha çacé-nandana, jagata jébana dhana, anukhaëa prema-dhana
          jaga-jane yäce
bhäbe bibhora bara, gaura-tanu pulakita, saghane baliyä hari
          gorä pahuà näce
2. (Refrain) saba abatära sära gorä abatära
hema baraëa jini, nirupama tanu-khäni, aruëa-nayane bahe
          premake dhära
3. båndäbana guëa çuni, luöhata se dwija-maëi, bhäbe bhare gara gara
          pahuà mora häse
käçéçwara abhiräma, paëòita puruñottama, guëa gäna karatahi
          narahari däse


     1. Look at Çacé’s son! He is the life and treasure of all the worlds. At every moment He begs the world’s people to accept His gift of the great treasure of ecstatic spiritual love. He is overcome withecstatic spiritual love. The hairs on His fair body staned erect. Again and again He chants, “Hari!” Lord Gaura dances.
     2. (Refrain) Lord Gaura has descended to this world. He is thebest of all avatäras. His peerless form defeats the splendor of gold. Flooding rivers of ecstatic spiritual love stream as tears from His reddened eyes.
     3. Hearing the glories of Våndävana, He rolls on the ground. Lord Gaura, the jewel of the brähmaëas, laughs in ecstasy. Käçéçvara, Abhiräma, nnd Puruñottama Paëòita stay at His side. Thus Narahari däsa sings His glories.

Song 9 (Soma-räga)
&

1. (Refrain) näcata gaura püraba rase bhora
kanaka dharädhara        garaba bibhaïjana
          jhalakata aìga atanu cita-cora
2. häsata mådu mådu      badana chända chabi
          näçata ghora kaluña ändhiyära
dhara-ite täla      tarala pada-paìkaja
          kampa-i dharaëé saha-i nähi bhära
3. taruëa aruëa-yuga          locana òagamaga
          abirala bipula pulaka-kula säji
garajata saghana         siàha jini bikrama
          balé kali-käla bipula bhaye bhäji
4. bhedata gagana        gäne priya parikara
          bäyata khola lalita karatäla
mätala akhila loka       bhaëa narahari
          bhubana bharala yaça biñada biçäla


     1. (Refrain) Overcome by tasting the nectar of His previous pastimes as Lord Kåñëa, Lord Gaura dances. His glistening limbs, limbs that break the golden mountain’s pride, charm Kämadeva’s heart.
     2. The splendor of His gently gently smiling face destroys the blinding darkness of a host of horrible sins. His rhythmically dancing footsteps make the earth tremble. The earth has no power to hold Him up.
     3. The new red lotus flowers of His eyes always overfloww with tears of ecstatic spiritual love. he hairs of His body stand erect. Eclipsing the lions’ prowess, He roars. Frightened, the powerful age of Kali flees.
     4. Gracefully playing khola and karatälas, His dear companions sing. Their tumultuous music breaks the sky. Now all the worlds are wild with ecstatic spiritual love. Narahari says: Now Lord Gaura’s splendid pure glories fill all the worlds.

Song 10 (Deçapäla-räga)
&

1. nåtyata gauracandra jana-raïjana, nityänanda bipada-bhaya-bhaïjana
kaïja-nayana jiti naba naba khaïjana, cähani manamatha garaba hare
jhalakata duhuà tanu kanaka dharädhara, naöana ghaöana paga dharata dharaëé para
häsa milita mukha layata sudhäkara, ucari bacana janu amiyä jhare
2. çobhä nirupama bhaëatana äyata, beñöita parikara guëa-gaëa gäyata
madhura madhura mådu mardala bäyata, dhädhä dhigi dhigi dhikaöa dhilaìga
gaëa saha sura-gaëa gagana-pantha-gata, ghana ghana sarasa kusuma bara barañata
jaya jaya jaya dhwani bhubana biyäpata, narahari kahaba ki prema-taraìga


     1. Lord Gauracandra, who delights everyone. Lord Nityänanda, weho breaks all fear of any calamity, dances at His side. Their lotus eyes defeat the young young khaïjana birds. Their graceful eyes steal away Kämadeva’s pride. Their forms glisten like two golden mountains. Somehow the earth sustains Their dancing footsteps. The smiling enctyar moons of Theor faces meet. Their words are like flowing streams of sweet nectar.
     2. Their words are glorious without peer. They are surrounded by companions who sing of Their glories. Sweetly sweetly the musical instruments are gently sounded. “Dhädhä dhigi dhigi dhikaöa dhilaìga!”, the drums declare. Assembling in the pathway of the sky, the demigods and their associates shower flowers. Sounds of “Jaya! Jaya! Jaya!” fills the worlds. Will Narahari ever be able to describe the waves of ecstatic spiritual love that flooded everything at that time?

Song 11 (Kämoda-räga)
&

1. (Refrain) äju ki änanda saìkértane
näce gaura nityänanda         parama änanda-kanda
          priya päriñada-bånda sane
2. näce bole bhäla bhäla      bäje khola karatäla
          sabe mahä bihwola premäya
nadérä prabäha pärä      sabära nayane dhärä
          keha keha paòe kära gäya
3. keha bä pulaka-bhare       huìkära garjana kare
          kämpe kega thira haite näre
keha käru päne cäïä         du-i bähu pasäriyä
          kole kari chäòite nä päre
4. keha käru päya dhare        pada-dhüli laya çire
          keha bhüme paòi paòi yäya
prabhu bhåtya eka riti        dekhi narahari ati
          änande prabhura guëa gäya


     1. (Refrain) How much bliss is now present in this saìkértana! Surrounded by Their dear associates, Lord Gaura and Lord Nityänanda, who are the root of all transcendental bliss, dance.
     2. They dance and call out, “Glory! Glory!” The devotees play kholas and karatälas. Everyone is overcome with ecstatic spiritual love. Flooding rivers of tears flow from everyone’s eyes. Some joyfully sing. Some, overcome with ecstasy, fall to the ground.
     3. Soem have bodily hairs that stand erect. Some loudly roar. Some tremble. Some cannot remain peaceful and steady. Some gaze at Lord Gaura. Some extend their arms and hug the other devotees. They will not let go.
     4. Some grasp the devotees’ feet and place the dust on their own head. Some stumble and stumble, falling to the ground as they walk. Gazing at the two Lords as They dance, the servant Narahari joyfully sings the two Lord’s glories.

