[p.1]
Bhakti Ratnäkara :
The Ocean Of Devotion
CONTENTS
1. Sanätana Gosvämé and the girls' braids ...................................................................... 1
2. Ganthulé Gräma and Guläl Kuëòa.............................................................................. 2
3. Kokilavana..................................................................................................................... 3
4. Aïjanaka ....................................................................................................................... 4
5. Umräo ........................................................................................................................... 4
6. Naré Semaré................................................................................................................... 6
7. Pävana Sarovara............................................................................................................ 7
8. Caraëa Pähäòi............................................................................................................... 9
9. Våndävana's Céra Ghäöa ............................................................................................... 9
10.Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé's vision in Våndävana............................................................... 10
11.Çréla Narottama Däsa Thäkura's Mental service at Rädhäkuëòa. .......................... 11
12.Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé's love for the people of Vraja. ........................................... 12
13.Çréla Raghunätha Däsa Gosvämé and the tigers. ..................................................... 12
14.Gopéçvara Mahädeva in Våndävana.......................................................................... 13
15.Bhäëòéravana. ........................................................................................................... 13
16.Häroyäla..................................................................................................................... 14
17.Çuka-Çärikä Praläpa................................................................................................... 15
18.Çréla Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé reads Lalita Mädhava........................................... 16
19.Mä Jähnavä's stay at Rädhäkuëòa............................................................................ 16

1. SANÄTANA GOSVÄMÉ AND THE GIRLS' BRAIDS
(Fifth Wave, verses 754 - 764)
ahe çréniväsa ei våkñera taläya; hoilo ye raìga tähä kohiye tomäya
eka dina sanätana govardhana hoite; ethä äilä rüpa raghunäthera dekhite
"O Çréniväsa!", Räghava Paëòita told Çréniväsäcärya, "I will tell you what pastime
took place at the base of this tree! One day Sanätana Gosvämé came here (to

1

[p.2]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

Rädhäkuëòa) from Govardhana to see Çré Rüpa and Çré Raghunätha Däsa Gosvämé!"
(754-5)
çré rüpa gosvämé padya koroye racanä; veëéra upamä dilo vyäläìganä phanä
sanätana gosvämé dekhiyä kichu koy; dilä e upamä - ihä hoy vä nä hoy
"Çré Rüpa Gosvämé had written a verse in which he compared Çrématé Rädhäräné's
braid with the hoods of a female snake. Seeing this verse, Sanätana Gosvämé said: "I
don't know if this is a good comparison or not!" (756-7)
eto kohi' äsiyä nämilä kuëòajale; dekhaye - bälikägaëa khele våkñatale
bälikä mastake veëé péöhete loöäya; sanätana dekhe - sarpa-bhrama hoilo täy
bälikägaëa prati kohe ati vyaghra hoiyä; mäthäya caòhaye sarpa påñöhadeça diyä
abodha bälikägana häo sävadhäna!; eto kohi nivärite korilä payäna
"Saying this, he went down to the lake and saw (reflected) in the water that some
girls were playing under a tree. When Sanätana Gosvämé saw the braids of these girls,
that hung down their backs, he mistook them for snakes. Very anxiously he told the
girls: "O stupid girls! Be careful! Snakes are crawling up your backs!", and ran up to
them to stop these snakes. Seeing that Sanätana Gosvämé was very upset, the girls
giggled and disappeared!" (758-62)
sanätana atiçaya vyäkula dekhiyä; antardhäna hoilä sobe éñat häsiyä
sanätana vihvala hoilä ekhäne; sthira hoiyä gelä rüpa gosväméra sthäne
rüpe kohe - ye likhilä sei satya hoy; çré rüpa jänile sanätanera hådoy
"Here (on the eastern bank of Rädhäkuëòa) Sanätana Gosvämé became
overwhelmed. After calming down he went to Çré Rüpa Gosvämé and said: "What you
wrote (about the snake) was true!" Çré Rüpa understood what was on Sanätana's mind
(and that he had understood the purport of the verses)." (763-764)

2. GANTHULI GRÄMA AND GULÄL KUËÒA
The village of Gänthuli lies 3 km. west of the town of Govardhana. Here Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu saw the Gopäla-deity (see Caitanya Caritämåta Madhya-lélä chapter 18)
aiche parikramä kori govardhana diyä; gelena gänthuli gräme ullasita hoiyä
räghava paëòita çréniväsa prati koy; kohiye gäthuli gräma näma yaiche hoy
ethä holi kheli doìhe boise siàhäsane; sakhé duhun vastre gänthi dilä saìgopane
siàhäsana hoite doìhe uöhilä yokhon; dekhaye bosoye gänthi häse sakhé-gaëa
hoilo kautuka ati doìhe lajjä päilä; phäguya loiyä keho gänthi khuli dilä
e hetu gäthuli - e guläl kuëòa jale; ebe phägu dekhe loka vasantera käle
2

[p.3]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

They blissfully proceeded on the parikramä of Govardhana Hill until they
reached the village of Gänthulé. Here Räghava Paëòita explained to Çréniväsa why the
village was named Gänthulé. He said: "During the Holi pastimes, Rädhä and Kåñëa sat
down on Their throne here and the sakhés secretly went up to Them from behind to
tie up Their clothes. Then they sat down and laughed when the Divine Couple
wanted to get up and dance, but were unable to separate because of the knot. Rädhä
and Kåñëa became very shy then and one of the sakhés loosened the knot and threw
some coloured powder at Them. That is why this village is named Gänthulé (the word
is derived from the Sanskrit word grantha, which means knot). Even now every spring
season people can see that the lake near this village, named Guläl kuëòa (guläl is a
colored substance used for celebrating Holi) is filled with colour!"

3. KOKILAVANA
Kokilavana lies on the left side of the road, halfway between Nandagräma and
Kosi, and can only be reached on foot.
kåñëa mahä kautuki paramänandamoy; kokila saubhägya hetu se çabde miloy
yävatera paçcime e vana manohara; lakña lakña kokila kuhare nirantara
eka dina kåñëa ei vanete äsiyä; kokila sadåça çabda kore harña hoiyä
sakala kokila hoite çabda sumadhura; ye çune bäreka tära dhairya yäya düra
"In great bliss and to the great fortune of the cuckoos Kåñëa sang here just like a
cuckoo! This beautiful forest lies west of Yävata (where Rädhäräëé lives with Her inlaws) and hundreds and thousands of cuckoos always sing there very beautifully. One
day Kåñëa came to this forest and sang there as beautiful as a cuckoo. The patience of
anyone who heard His sweet song even once would go far away." (1160-1163)
jatilä kohoye viçäkhäre priya-väëé; kokilera çabda aiche kabhu nähi çuni
viçäkhä kohoye - ei mo sabhära mane; yadi koho e kokile dekhi giyä vane
"With a pleasant voice Jaöilä, Çré Rädhikä's mother-in-law, told Viçäkhä: "I've
never heard such sweet singing of the cuckoos!" Viçäkhä said: "That's also what we
think! If you will allow us, we will go into the forest to see this cuckoo!" (1164-1165)
våddhä kohe yäo çuni ulläsa açeña; räi - sakhé saha vane korilä praveça
hoilo mahä kautuka sukhera sémä näi; sakalei äsiyä mililä eka öhäi
kokilera çabde kåñëa mile rädhikäre; ei hetu kokilavana kohoye ihäre

3

[p.4]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"Old Jatilä said: "Allright, go!" Hearing this, Räi and Her sakhés entered that forest
in boundless bliss. In this way Kåñëa managed to meet Çré Rädhikä by singing like a
cuckoo and that is why this forest is named Kokila-vana." (1166-1168)

4. AÏJANAKA
This village lies two miles south of Khadirvana and is sometimes mentioned as
being the birthplace of Indulekhä-sakhé.
ahe çréniväsa dekho aïjanaka gräma; ethä rädhä-kåñëera viläsa anupama
çré rädhikä nija veça koroye nirjane; hoilä bhüñita nänä ratnädi bhüñaëe
veça bandhanädi kori aïjana porite, akasmät vaàçé-dhvani praveçe karëete
sei kñaëe çré rädhikä sakhé-gaëa saìge; ethä äsi kåñëa mililen mahä raìge
"Ohe Çréniväsa! Behold this village of Aïjanaka! Here Rädhä and Kåñëa had a
great pastime! Once Çré Rädhikä privately dressed and ornamented Herself here with
different jewels. When She applied Her own eyeliner the sound of Kåñëa's flute
suddenly entered Her ear, so She ran to this place with Her girlfriends and very
blissfully met Kåñëa there." (1169-1172)
ägusari äni kåñëa vihvala hoilä; våndä viracita puñpäsane bosäilä
dekhe aìga sobhä - netre nä dekhe añjana; jijïäsite våttänta kohila sakhégaëa
rasera äveçe kåñëa aïjana loiyä; dilen rädhikä netre mahä harña hoiyä
aïjanera chale nänä parihäsa koilo; e hetu e sthäna näma aïjanaka hoilo
"Kåñëa ecstatically seated Rädhikä on a seat of flowers arranged by Våndä, but
when He beheld Her bodily beauty He saw that She had no mascara on Her eyes. He
asked the sakhés what was the matter and then took some mascara and applied it to
Rädhikä's eyes in loving ecstasy. Because there was so much fun here about eyeliner
(aïjana) this place is named Aïjanaka." (1173-1176)

5. UMRÄO
Umräo lies closest to Chätä, a bigger town in the center of Vraja Maëòala.
chatravane kåñëa räjä kori sakhägaëa; räjä äjïä bole kore sarvatra çäsana
madhumaìgalädi sabe pragalbha vacane; kåñëera dohäi diyä phire vane vane
mahäräja chatrapati nandera kumära; tära e räjyete näi anya adhikära
yadi keho puñpa cayanete ethä äise; tabe daëòa dibo tare loiyä räjä päçe

4

[p.5]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"In Chatravana Kåñëa declared Himself king of Vraja, and His friends went out on
His order to control the kingdom. Headed by Madhumaìgala, they went from forest
to forest, boldly declaring Kåñëa the King of Vraja. They said: "Kåñëa, the son of Nanda
Mahäräja, is the king, and no-one else but He is in power here! If anyone comes here
to pick flowers, we will take that person before the king to be punished!" (1220-1223)
lalitädi sakhé krodhe kohe bära bär; rädhikära räjye ke koroye adhikära
aiche koto kohi lalitädi sakhégaëa; rädhikära umräo koilä seikñaëa
umräo yogya siàhäsane bosi räi; sakhégaëa prati kohe caturdike cäi
more räjye adhikära kore yäi jana; paräbhava kori täre äno eikñaëa
"But Lalitä and her friends were angry and asked again and again: "Who wants to
have any power in Rädhikä's kingdom?" Thus they established Rädhikä's kingdom, by
seating Her on a suitable throne and faithfully surrounding Her. Çré Rädhikä ordered:
"Defeat anyone who wants to control My kingdom and bring Him here!" (1224-1227)
çuni sajjä hoiyä cole yuddha koribäre; våndä vinirmita puñpa-yañöi loiya kare
sahasra sahasra sakhé cole cäri bhite; subalädi sakhä tähä dekhe düra hoite
çré madhumaìgala nä kohiya päläilo; kon sakhé giyä madhumaìgala dharilo
puñpamälä diyä hasta bandhana korilä; umräo päçe çéghra loiyä äilä
"Hearing this, the sakhés dressed themselves and set out for battle, carrying a
flower-scepter made by Våndä with them. Thousands and thousands of sakhés
scattered in all four directions and Subala and other cowboys saw them coming from a
distance. Çré Madhumaìgala fled without saying anything, but one sakhé caught him,
bound his hands with a flowergarland and quickly brought him before empress
Rädhä."
dekhi' madhumaìgala kohoye bära bär; käro räjye koräo kähära adhikära
tomä sabä saha daëòa dibo se räjäre; yeno yaiche karma äro kabhu nähi kore
çuni' madhu kohoye koriya muëòa heta; aiche daëòa koro yäte bhare mora peöa
umräo kohe - e peöärthi brähmaëe; chäòi deho yäuk räjära sannidhäne
"Seeing Madhumangala, empress Rädhikä said: "Which king's order carrier are
you? I will punish you and all of your companions so that you will never be so bold
again!" Hearing this, Madhumaìgala lowered his head and said: "Punish me in such a
way that my belly will become full!" The empress said: "Let this brähmaëa, who is only
interested in his belly, go back to his Lord!" (1232-1235)
sakhégaëa dilä madhumaìgale chäòiyä; bandhana sahita madhu colilo dhäiyä
mahä darpe räjä bosi' räja siàhäsane; madhumaìgalere kohe - aiche daçä kene
5

[p.6]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

vimarña hoiyä madhu kohe bära bär; tomära korinu räjä ei phala tära
teìho umräo - tära pratäpa apära; tumi ki koribe tära räjye adhikära
"So the sakhés let Madhumaìgala go. He ran away with his hands still bound.
When king Kåñëa, who very proudly sat on His throne, saw Madhumaìgala, He asked
him: "How did you end up in this condition?" Madhumaìgala morosely replied: "You
see, this is the result of my trying to maintain Your kingdom! The power of that
empress is unlimited! How can You ever usurp Her empire?" (1236-1239)
ye kandarpa jagatera dhairya-dhana hare; se kandarpa kampe tära netra-bhaìgé
dväre
tähäte mänaho tumi ämära vacana; nijäìga samarpi leho tähära çaraëa
kåñëa kohe - madhu ye kohilä sarvopari; tomäre bandhilo duùka sahite na päri
madhu kohe - tomära maìgala mätra cäi; apamäna hoile-o kono duùka näi
"That Cupid, who destroys the patience of everyone in this world, himself shivers
when She even blinks with Her eyes, so heed my words and take shelter of Her,
offering Your own body to Her!" Kåñëa said: "Madhu, what you say is the best advice! I
cannot tolerate to see you suffer in this bondage!" Madhumangala said: "I only desire
Your welfare! Although I was dishonoured I don't feel any misery!" (1240-1243)
eto kohi kåñëa hasta kori äkarñaëa; rädhikära nikaöe äise sei kñaëa
präëanätha gamana dekhiyä sukhe räi; hoilen adhairya - lajjä sémä näi
umräo veça räi ghucäite cäy; sakhé kohe - ei veçe rahibe ethäy
rädhikära aiche veça kåñëa' dekhi düre; hoilo asthira dhairya dharite na päre
"Saying this, Madhumaìgala took Kåñëa by the hand and brought Him at once to
Çré Rädhikä. Seeing the Lord of Her Heart coming, Çré Rädhikä was very happy and
She became impatient. There was no limit to Her bashfulness and She wanted to give
up Her royal dress, but Her sakhés told Her: "This dress will stay here (You will have
to wear it still!)!" Seeing Rädhikä's dress from a distance, Kåñëa could not remain
calm." (1244-1247)
kåñëa ceñöä dekhi madhu ulläsa hiyäya; rädhikä samépe kåñëe änilo tvaräya
rädhikä daksina päçe kåñëe bosäilo; kåñëa väme räi ki adbhuta çobhä hoilo
rädhikära prati madhu kohe bära bär; ebe kåñëa loho räjye koro adhikära
kåñëa ye diben eka äliìgana ratna; se tomära bheta - tä loibe kori yatne
"Madhumaìgala was very happy at heart when He saw Kåñëa's condition and He
quickly brought Him before Rädhikä, seating Him on Her right side. How beautiful
Rädhikä looked, sitting on Kåñëa's left! Again and again Madhumaìgala told Rädhikä:
6

[p.7]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"Now take Kåñëa (as Your husband) and rule Your empire! The prize You will get for
that is His jewel-like embrace! Accept that prize carefully!" (1248-1251)
çuni madhu vacana lalitä häsi sukhe; dilena modaka madhumaìgalera mukhe
madhu kohe koilä doña bändhilä ämäya; aiche lakña laòòu bhuïjäile doña yäya
eto kohi bhaìgi kori' modaka bhuñjaye; sakhé suveñöita duìhe çobhä nirékñaye
modaka bhuïjiyä ati sumadhura bhäse; bahu kärya äche - boli coloye ulläse
"Hearing Madhumaìgala's words, Lalitä blissfully laughed and put a sweetmeat
in his mouth. Madhumaìgala said: "You have offended me, but you will be forgiven if
you give me a hundred thousand laòòus like that!" Saying that, he made many
gestures and ate the sweets, while gazing at the beauty of Rädhä and Kåñëa being
surrounded by Their sakhés. While enjoying the sweets, he sweetly said: "I have a lot
of things to do!" and blissfully went off.
umräo, räjä - donhe nikuïja bhavane; korilä praveça ati ullasita mane
surata samare doìhe çrama yukta hoilä; vividha kautuke sakhé çrama düra koilä
ahe çréniväsa raìga kohite ki ära; umräo gräma näma e hetu ihära
"Then the emperor and the empress joyfully entered into a grove cottage. When
They became tired of Their lovesports there, the sakhés soothed Them in different
expert ways. Ahe Çréniväsa! What more can I say about all the fun that went on there?
For this reason this village was named Umräo!" (1256-1258)

6. NARÉ SEMARÉ
paëòita kohoye - naré semaré - e gräme; çyämaré kinnaré - e grämera pürva näma
rädhikära mäna bhaìga upäy nä dekhi; eikhäne çré kåñëa hoilä çyämä sakhé
véëä yantra bäjäiya äilä ethäy; çré rädhikä kohe - e kinnaré sarvathäy
çuni véëä vädya räi vihvala hoilä; nija ratna-mälä tära gale poräilä
kinnaré kohe - mäna ratna more deho; anugraha koriyä äpana kori leho
e väkya çuniyä räi manda manda häse; düre gelo mäna - magna hoilä ulläse
Räghava Paëòita said: "This village Naré Semaré was previously called Çyämaré
Kinnaré. One time Çré Kåñëa found no means to soothe Çré Rädhikä's proud huff, so
He dressed Himself like a gopé named Çyämä-sakhé here, playing a Véëä. Çré Rädhikä,
hearing the sound of this Véëä, was overwhelmed with joy and said: "This must be a
Kinnaré (demigoddess)!" She took Her own jewel necklace and hung it around
Çyämä-sakhé's neck. That Kinnaré then said: "Give Me the jewel of Your pride (give up
Your anger towards Me)!" Hearing these words, Rädhikä smiled slightly. Her anger
was gone and She was once again immersed in bliss." (1270-1275)
7

[p.8]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

7. PÄVANA SAROVARA
Çréla Räghava Paëòita describes a pastime of Sanätana Gosvämé by this celebrated
lake near Nandagräma.
våndävana hoite äsi' e nirjana vane; premete vihvala sadä kåñëa ärädhane
saìgopane rahe bhakñaëera ceñöä näi; keho nä jänaye - ke ächaye ei öhäi
"Çréla Sanätana Gosvämé came from Våndävana to this lonely forest and constantly
worshiped Kåñëa here in ecstatic love. He stayed here without even endeavouring to
collect any food. No one knew that he was there." (1301-1302)
kåñëa gopa bälakera chale dugdha loiyä; däòäilä gosvämé sammukhe harña hoiyä
go rakñaka veça mäthe uñëéça çobhäya; dugdha bhaëòa häte dhari' gosvämére koy
ächaho nirjane tomä keho nähi jäne; dekhiläm tomäre äsiyä gocäraëe
ei dugdha pän koro ämära kothäy; loiyä yäibo bhäëòa räkhilo ethäy
"Kåñëa then came to him dressed as a cowherdboy, blissfully standing before Him
with some milk. He had a beautiful turban on His head and a milkpot in His hand as
He told Sanätana Gosvämé: "Nobody knows that you're here all alone! I saw You here
when I came here to herd My cows. Please drink this milk! I will pick up the pot later,
just keep it here!" (1303-1306)
kuöére rohile mo sabhära sukha hobe; aiche raho ithe vrajaväsé duùka päbe
eto kohi' gopälera hoilo gamana; mugdha hoiyä pän koilo sanätana
dugdha pän mätre preme adhairya hoilo; netrajale sikta hoiyä bahu kheda koilä
alakñite prabhu sanätana prabodhilä; vrajaväsé dväre eka kuöére koräilä
aiche sanätanera hoilo väsäloy; madhye madhye ethä çré rüpera sthiti hoy
"We will all be happy if you would stay in a hut (instead of outside)! If you stay
here like this, the people of Vraja will be very sad!" Saying this, Gopäla went away and
Sanätana drank the milk in an enchanted state. After he drank, he became
overwhelmed with ecstatic love and he sprinkled himself with tears. The Lord secretly
addressed Sanätana Gosvämé and had the people of Vraja make a hut for him. In this
way Sanätana Gosvämé got his own dwellingplace there. Sometimes Çré Rüpa Gosvämé
also stayed there." (1307-1311)
eka dina çré rüpa gosvämi sanätane;
bhunjäite dugdhännädi korilen mane
aiche mane kori punaù saìkocita hoilä;
çré rüpera manovåtti rädhikä jänilä
ghåta dugdha taëòula çarkarädi loiyä;
gopa bälikära chale äilä harña hoiyä

8

[p.9]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"One day Çré Rüpa Gosvämé thought of feeding Sanätana Gosvämé (his guru)
some kñéra (sweet rice). He became hesitant, but Çré Radhika had seen what was on
his mind, so She blissfully came before Him as a cowherd girl, bringing ghé (clarified
butter), milk, rice and sugar with Her." (1312-1314)
rüpa prati kohe svämé ei sab leho; çéghra päk kori kåñëe samarpi bhunjäho
mätä mora ei kothä kohilo kohite; kono-i saìkoca yeno nähi kabhu cite
eto kohi çré rädhikä kautuke colilä;
çré rüpa gosvämé sukhe séghra päk koilä
"She told Çré Rüpa: "O Sväméjé! Take all these ingredients, quickly cook for Kåñëa
and offer it to Him! My mother told Me to do this, so don't feel shy at all!" After
saying this, Çré Rädhikä joyfully left and Çré Rüpa Gosvämé blissfully began to cook."
(1315-1317)
kåñëe samarpiyä gosvämi sanätana; kori pariveñana paramänanda mane
sanätana gosvämé sämagré sugandhite; nä jäne kautuka sukha upajäya cite
dui eka gräsa mukhe diyä sanätana; hoilä adhairya - açru nahe nivärana
sanätana sämagré våttänta jijïäsilo; çré rüpa kramete sab våttänta kohilo
"After offering the food to Kåñëa, Rüpa Gosvämé served it to Sanätana Gosvämé. I
cannot describe Sanätana Gosvämé's ecstasy when he smelled the nice fragrance of
these dishes! After he had eaten one or two mouthfuls, Sanätana became agitated with
ecstasy and could not withold his tears of love. When Sanätana Gosvämé inquired
about the origin of the ingredients, Çré Rüpa Gosvämé gradually told him everything."
(1318-1321)
çuniyä gosvämi niñedhaye bära bär; aiche bhakñya dravya ceñöä nä koriho är
eto kohi' mahä prasäda sevä koilä; çré rüpa gosvämé ati kheda yukta hoilä
svapna cchale çré rädhikä diyä daraçane; prabodhilä çré rüpe jänilä sanätane
"Hearing the story, Sanätana Gosvämé repeatedly forbade Çré Rüpa Gosvämé to
prepare food for which Çré Rädhikä personally had to come to provide the ingredients.
After that he honoured the prasäda, leaving Çré Rüpa repenting his act. Çré Rädhikä
then appeared to Çré Rüpa in a dream and consoled him. Sanätana Gosvämé was aware
of that (so he did not blame Rüpa Gosvämé anymore)." (1322-1324)
ahe çréniväsa yaiche rüpera dhairya; vaiñëava samäje vyakta hoilo äçcarya
eka dina rädhä-kåñëa viccheda kathäte; kändaye vaiñëava murcchägata påthivéte
agni-çikhä präya jvale rüpera hådoy; tathäpi bähire kichu prakäça nä hoy
käru dehe çré rüpera niçväsa sparçilo; agni dagdha präy tära dehe braëa hoilo

9

[p.10]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"Ahe Çréniväsa! The Vaiñëava-world was astonished at the gravity of Rüpa
Gosvämé! One day he felt so much separation from Rädhä and Kåñëa that he cried and
fainted, falling on the ground before the Vaiñëavas. His heart was as if burning in the
high flames of a fire, but still none of this was externally visible. But if Çré Rüpa's
outgoing breath touched anyone's body, that body was burned and caught a blister!"
(1325-1328)

8. CARAËA PÄHÄÒI
At this place, which is just outside of Nandagräma, on the right side of the road to
Kämyavana, Kåñëa's footprints are visible.
caraëa pähäòi ei parvatera näma; ethä kåñëa-candrera kautuka anupama
sakhä suveñöita kåñëa cäriyä parbate; gogaëa carave düre - dekhe cäri bhite
bhuvana mohana veçe vaàçé kore loiyä; däòäilä våkñatale tribhaìga hoiyä
"This hill is named Carana Pähäòi. Here Kåñëacandra had lots of fun. Surrounded
by His friends He climbed upon the hill and saw His cows grazing everywhere from
afar. He took His flute in His hand and stood under a tree in His beautiful threefold
bending form and His world- enchanting dress." (1391-1393)
vamçé vädyärambha mätre jagata mätilo; ye yathä chilen saba dhäiyä äsilo
vaàçé gäna çravane sthagita sabe hoilä; tulanä ki gäna - ei parvata dravilä
vaàçé dhvani suniyä ye äilo ethäya; tän sabära pada cihna dekhaho siläya
çré kåñëera päda padma cihna e rahilo; ei hetu carana pähäri näma hoilo
"As soon as He began to play His flute, He maddened the whole world, and
everyone came running to Him from wherever he was. Everyone was stunned by His
flutesong; what can it be compared with? It made even this mountain melt! Just look
at all these footprints on this rock! These are the footprints of all those who came to
see Kåñëa after hearing His flute song! Because Çré Kåñëa's lotusfoot prints are here,
this place is named Carana Pähäòi (the hill with footprints)." (1394-1397)

9. VÅNDÄVANA'S CÉRA GHÄÖA
ahe çréniväsa ei céra ghäöa hoy; keho vä cayana ghäöa ihäre kohoy
eka dina rädhä-kåñëa sakhégaëa saìge; räsädi viläsa ante ethä äilä sthäne
vasträdika rakhi ei népa våkña tale; sükñma kharva vastra pare nämilena jale
hoiyächilen çränta vividha viläse; çrama çränti hoilo snigdha yamunä paraçe

10

[p.11]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"Ohe Çréniväsa! This Céra Ghäöa (on the bank of the Yamunä) is also called Cayana
Ghäöa by some! One day, at the end of the Räsa-lélä, Rädhä and Kåñëa came here with
Their sakhés. They kept Their clothes here under this Kadamba-tree, put on thin
short dresses and went into the water. They felt great relief from Their fatigue (of
dancing the Räsa) by touching the Yamunä-water." (2359-2362)
väri viharane mahäraìga upajilo; sakalei giyä padma vane praveçilo
kåñëa kono chalete äsiyä våkñatale; kori vastra gopana praveçe punaù jale
kotokñaëe jala keli kori uöhe tére; vastra nä dekhiyä sabe cintita antare
kåñëa se samaye adbhuta çobhä heri; dilena sabäre vastra parihäsa kori
"They had a lot of fun playing in the water and they all entered into a cluster of
lotus flowers there. Then Kåñëa, through some trick, came back to the Kadamba-tree,
hid the gopés' clothes and went back into the water. The gopés continued their water
sports for some time more and then climbed back on the shore again. They became
worried when they could not find their clothes back, but Kåñëa returned their clothes
after He had admired their amazing beauty. Such are His joking sports!" (2363-2366)

10. ÇRÉLA R¶PA GOSVÄMÉ'S VISION IN VÅNDÄVANA
eka dina çré rüpa gosvämé våndävane; bhävaye mänase mahä ullasita hoiyä
rädhikära veça viracaye sakhégana; påñöha deçe rahi kåñëa kore nirékñaëa
kåñëa ye dekhen tähä rädhikä nä jäne; jänäite sakhéra kautuka bädhe mane
vicitra bandhane kesa koriyä bandhana; rädhikära äge sakhé dharilä darpana
"One day Çré Rüpa Gosvämé blissfully meditated in Våndävana that the sakhés
were dressing Çré Rädhikä while Kåñëa secretly stood behind them, watching them.
Çré Rädhikä did not notice it, and Kåñëa increased His own pleasure by making His
presence known to the sakhés only. After the sakhés had braided Rädhikä's hair with a
beautiful string, they held a mirror before Her." (3805-3808)
çré rädhikä nija mukha çobhä nirakhite; kåñëa mukhacandra dekhe sei darpaëete
vyasta hoilen räi lajjä atiçaya; loiyä vasana çéghra sarväìga jhäpaya
sakhégana häse mahä kautuka hoilo; çré rüpa gosvämé sei sangei hasilo
"When Çré Rädhikä beheld the beauty of Her own face in the mirror, She saw
Kåñëa's moonlike face behind Her. She became very shy and quickly took a garment
to cover Herself with. When the sakhés saw this fun, they began to laugh and Çré Rüpa
Gosvämé (in his spiritual identity as Çré Rüpa Maïjaré) laughed with them."
(3809-3811)

11

[p.12]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

heno käle äilä vaiñëava eka jana; çré rüpe dekhite ati utkaëöhita mana
çré rüpa häsen dekhi' kichu nä kohilä; vimarña hoiyä sanätana äge gelä
"Just then one Vaiñëava came who was eager to see Çré Rüpa Gosvämé. Çré Rüpa just
laughed without saying anything to that Vaiñëava-devotee, so the devotee became
displeased and went to Sanätana Gosvämé." (3812-3813)
vaiñëava kohoye genu çré rüpa dekhite; ämäre dekhiyä teìho lägilä häsite
mano duùké hoiyä äre kichu nä kohinu; na bujhi käraëa kichu jijïäsite äinu
ye nimitta häse tä kohilä sanätana; çuni vaiñëavera hoilo kheda yukta mana
vaiñëava kohen e samaya keno genu; tära mäna nä bujhiyä aparädha koinu
"That Vaiñëava said: "I went to see Çré Rüpa Gosvämé, but he only laughed at me!
I became sad and I did not say anything, although I came to him to ask him
something. I cannot understand why he behaved like that!" So Sanätana Gosvämé
explained that Vaiñëava why Rüpa Gosvämé was laughing. When the Vaiñëava heard
this, he felt very sorry for misunderstanding Rüpa Gosvämé in this way and he said:
"Why did I go to see him just now? I committed a great offense to him, not
understanding his mind!" (3814-3817)

11. ÇRÉLA NAROTTAMA DÄSA ÖHÄKURA'S MENTAL SERVICE AT
RÄDHÄKUËÒA
(Sixth Wave, Verses 168-174)
eka dina rädhä kåñëa sakhégaëa saìge; vilasaye nikuïje parama prema raìge
çré rädhikä kautuke kohoye sakhé prati; ethä bhakñya dravya çéghra koro susaìgati
"One day Rädhä and Kåñëa were playing in the nikuïja with Their sakhés with
great love and Çré Rädhikä eagerly told Her friends: "Quickly arrange for something to
eat here!"
lalitädi sakhé mahä ullasita hoiyä; bhakñaëa sämagré sabe kore yatna päiyä
narottama däsé rüpe ati yatna mate; dugdha ävartana kore sakhéra iìgite
Lalitä and her sakhés then very blissfully collected the ingredients for the
picknick and Narottama Däsa, in his spiritual body as Rädhikä's maidservant, very
carefully stirred the milk on the sakhés' indication." (170-171)
uöhali paraye dugdha dekhi vyasta hoilä; culli hoite dugdha pätra haste nämäilä
hasta dagdha hoilo - tähä kichu småti näi; dugdha ävartana kori' dilä sakhé öhäi
12

[p.13]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

manera änande rädhä-kåñëe bhunjäilo; avaçeña labhya mätre bähya jïäna hoilo
"He became very upset when he saw that the milk boiled over and he quickly
lifted the milkpot from the fire with his hand. In this way he burned his hand, but he
was not aware of it and gave the milk to another sakhé to stir it. In great joy he
mentally offered the milk to Rädhä and Kåñëa and only when They left him Their
remnants He returned to external conciousness. (In other words, he burned his
material hand, although he was rendering devotional service in a mentally conceived
spiritual body)." (172-174)

12. SANÄTANA GOSVÄMÉ'S LOVE FOR THE PEOPLE OF VRAJA
sanätana gosvämé parama snehäveçe; sabe sarva prakärei maìgala jijïäse
käro koto kanyä putra viväha kothäy; ki näma kähära kaiche pravéna nirbhäya
gäbhé våñädika koto kåñékarma karo; käro gåhe çasya koto kaiche vyavahäro
çaréra ayogya käo kaiche manovåtti; aiche jijïäsite sabe hon harña ati
gosväméte krame sabe sab nivedaya; käru duùka çunitei mahä duùké hoya
ei sab prasaìge rätri prabhäta koroya
(Although Sanätana Gosvämé was most renounced, his love for the people of
Vraja transcended all his rules of renunciation and out of great love for them he would
speak about worldly subjects with them all night). "Most affectionately Sanätana
Gosvämé inquired from the Vrajaväsés about their welfare: How many sons and
daughters do you have and where are they married? What are their names and how
do they live? How much harvest you collected in your house and how much ploughing
have you done? Are you physically unwell? How do you feel mentally?" The Vrajaväsés
were all very happy when he asked these things from them and they gradually
informed him of everything. If anybody was suffering that would make Sanätana
Gosvämé very unhappy. In this way they passed the whole night, speaking until
sunrise."

13. ÇRÉLA RAGHUNÄTHA DÄSA GOSVÄMÉ AND THE TIGERS.
eka dina sanätana våndävana hoite; ethä äilä çré gopäla bhaööera väsäte
mänasa pävana ghäöe colilen snäne dekhe; eka vyaghra jala piye seikhäne
raghunätha dhyänäveçe ächen bosiyä; vyäghra vane gela tära nikaöa hoiyä
"One day Sanätana Gosvämé came here (to Rädhäkuëòa) from Våndävana to stay
with Çré Gopäla Bhatta. When he came to the bathingplace (on the northern bank of
Çyämakuëòa) named Mänasa Pävana Ghäöa (where Çré Rädhikä daily takes Her bath
13

[p.14]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

before worshiping the Sungod) he saw one tiger drinking water there. Raghunätha
Däsa sat there, absorbed in meditation, while the tiger passed him, going into the
forest."
kotokñaëe raghunätha cähe cäri päne; dekhena çré sanätana äisen snäne
bhümite poòiyä sanätane praëamiyä; sanätana snehävaçe äliìgana koilä
"After a while Raghunätha Däsa looked in all four directions and saw that Çré
Sanätana had come there for his bath. He fell to the ground to offer his obeisances to
Sanätana Gosvämé, who affectionately embraced him"
raghunätha prati snehe kohe dhére dhére; våkñatala hoite ebe rohibe kuöére
jänäiya viçeña gosvämé gelä snäne; kuöérera ärambha hoilo sei dine
anya hita hetu raghunätha sei hoite; rahilena kuöére gosäira äjïä mate
"Gently and affectionately Sanätana Gosvämé told Raghunätha Däsa: 'Leave the
base of this tree now and stay in a hut from now on!' After making this very clear,
Sanätana Gosvämé went for his bath. From that day on the kuöéra-system began
(Vaiñëavas at Rädhäkuëòa now live in small cottages instead of in the open air). From
then on, for the benefit of others, Raghunätha Däsa stayed in a hut, on the order of
Sanätana Gosvämé."

14. GOPÉÇVARA MAHÄDEVA IN VÅNDÄVANA
ki apürva çobhä ei vanera bhitora; guëätéta linga rüpa näma gopéçvara
ei sadäçiva våndä-vipina pälaya; ihäke püjile sarva kärya siddhi hoy
gopégaëa sadä kåñëa saìgera lägiyä; nirantara püje yatna nänä dravya diyä
kohite ki päri ye mahimä gurutara; gopikä püjita teìho näma gopéçvara
indrädi devatä stuti koroye sadäya; våndävane préti våddhi ihära kåpäya
"How wonderful is the beauty of this forest! Here is the transcendental liìgavigraha named Gopéçvara! This Sadäçiva (the transcendental source of all Çivas)
protects Våndävana; anyone who worships Him will be successful in all his duties! The
gopés always desired Kåñëa's association, and therefore they always carefully
worshiped Gopéçvara with different ingredients. How can I describe His great glories?
Because the gopékäs worship Him, He is called Gopéçvara (master of the gopés). The
demigods like Indra always praise Him, and by His grace one's love for Våndävana
increases"
våndävanävani pate jaya soma somamaule sanandana sanätana näradeòhya
gopeçvara vraja viläsi yugäìghri padme
prema prayaccha nirupädhi namo namas te
14

[p.15]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

(Viçvanätha Cakravarté's Saìkalpa Kalpadruma - 103)
"Glory to You, O Lord of Våndävana with the moon-crest! O Gopéçvara, who is
worshipable by Sanandana and the four Kumäras, Sanätana Gosvämé and Närada
Muni! We offer our obeisances unto You! Give us causeless love for the lotusfeet of
the two enjoyers of Vraja, Çré-Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa!"

15. BHÄËÒÉRA VANA
This forest lies on the eastern bank of the Yamunä, about 20 km. north of
Våndävana. Here was the famous huge Bhäëòéra-banyantree which is mentioned in
the Puräëas as being a playground for Kåñëa and His cowherd boys.
eka dina kåñëa eka bhäëòéra taläya; vaàçé vädya koilo yate jagata mätäya
vaàçé-dhvani çuni rädhä adhairya hoilä; sakhé saha äsi çéghra kåñëere mililä
hoilo paramänanda doìhära antare; sakhégaëa saìge nänä raìgete vihäre
"One day Kåñëa maddened the world by playing His flute at the base of this
Bhäëòéra-tree. Hearing the sound of the flute, Rädhä became impatient and quickly
came here with Her girlfriends to meet Kåñëa. Both Rädhä and Kåñëa became most
happy at heart and began to play here in different ways with Their girlfriends."
çré rädhikä kåñëa prati kohe mådu bhäñe; sakhä saha kaiche kréòä koro e pradeçe?
çré kåñëa kohena - ethä mallaveça dhari; sakhägaëa saha sukhe malla-yudha kori
mora sama malla-yuddha keho nä jänoy; anäyäse kori anya malle paräjoy
"Çré Rädhikä softly asked Kåñëa: "What kind of games do You play here with Your
friends?" Çré Kåñëa said: 'I dress like a wrestle and blissfully wrestle with My friends
here! No one knows how to wrestle like Me! I easily defeat everyone in wrestling!""
häsiyä lalitä kåñëe kohe bära bära; mallaveçe yuddha äji dekhibo tomära
eto kohi sakalei koila malla-veça; kåñëa mallaveçe darpa koroye açeña
kåñëa päne cähi räi manda manda häse; mallayuddha hetu yuddha sthalete praveçe
mahä malla-yuddhe nähi jaya paräjaya; hoilo änanda kandarpera atiçaya
"Lalitä laughed and told Kåñëa time and again: 'Let me see You fight in that
wrestlers dress today! When Lalitä said that, everyone dressed like wrestlers and
Kåñëa acted with unlimited pride in His wrestlingdress! Räi (Rädhikä) slightly smiled
while She blinked at Kåñëa and entered the wrestling arena to combat Kåñëa. A great
wrestling match then began, in which no one won and no one was defeated, and
which greatly delighted Cupid!"
15

[p.16]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

16. HÄROYÄLA
(Fifth Wave, 1398 - 1403)
The village of Häroyäla is now named Häroyäna and is situated about 11 km. west
of the town of Koçé.
dekho kåñëakuëòa ei häroyäla gräma; ethä vilasaye raìge räi-ghanaçyäma
päçä-kheläite räi kåñëa häräilä; kheläya häriyä kåñëa mahä-lajjä päilä
lalitä kohoye - räi päçaka kréòäte; anäyäse tumi häräilä präëanäthe
hoilo tomära jita aneka prakära; dekhibo - kandarpa-yuddhe kebä jita hoy
eto kohi nikuïja mandire doìhe thuiyä; sakhégaëa dekhe raìga alakñita hoiyä
hoilo paramänanda - kohite ki ära; ei häroyäla hoy adbhuta vihära
"Behold this Kåñëa-kuëòa in this village named Häroyäla; here Räi and
Ghanaçyäma enjoyed Their pastimes. Here Räi defeated Kåñëa in a game of dice,
greatly embarrassing Kåñëa. Lalitä said: "Räi! You easily defeated Your Präëanätha in
this dice-game! You were victorious in so many ways, let us see who will win the battle
of Cupid now!" Saying this, she brought Them into a nikuïja-mandira and the sakhés
all viewed (Rädhä and Kåñëa's lovegame) from hidden places. What words can I use to
describe that topmost bliss? All these amazing pastimes took place in the village
named Häroyäla!"

17. ÇRÉ ÇUKA-ÇARIKÄ PRALÄPA
The male and female parrots sing Rädhä and Kåñëa's glories in the Saòaìga Mediné
Räga
(Fifth Wave, Verses 2903-2911)
çuka präha - ñaòaìga mediné géte yathä :
jaya janaraïjana kaïja-nayana ghana aïjana nibha nava nägara ai ai
gokula kulajäkula dhåti mocana candra vadana guëa sägara ai ai
nanda tanuja vraja bhüñaëa rasamaya maïjula bhuja muda vardhana ai ai
çré våñabhänutanayä hådi sampada madanärbuda mada mardana ai ai
"All glories to You, O delighter of the people, O lotus-eyed One, O young lover
with the lustre of a monsoon cloud or eyeliner! You agitate the daughters of the
cowherders of Gokula and release them from their patience, Your face shines like the
moon and You are an ocean of virtues! O son of Nanda! O Ornament of Vraja! O

16

[p.17]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

Relisher wiht the beautiful arms! O increaser of bliss! O treasure of the heart of
Våñabhänu's daughter! O destroyer of the pride of billions of Cupids!"
géta nipuna nidhuvana nayanandita nirupama täëòava-paëòita ai ai
bhänu tanayä pulinäìgana parisara ramaëé nikara maëimaëòita ai ai
vaàçédhara dharaëédhara kåta bandhura adharäruëa sundara ai ai
kunda radana kamanéya kåçodara våndävipina purandara ai ai
kåña keli kalahaika dhurandhara dhä dhä dhi dhi tä ga dhennä ai ai
sa sari gari narahari-nätha ei tä iti ai ai a tennä ai ai
"O expert singer, who enjoys erotic pastimes in Nidhuvana! O peerless dancer! O
You who is ornamented (surrounded) by many jewellike girls on the broad bank of the
Yamunä, O holder of the flute, holder of the Govardhana Hill with Your beautiful red
lips! O You with the beautiful teeth, that resemble Kunda-flowers! O slender hero of
Våndävana! O Kåñëa! O Leader in all playful quarrels! O Lord of Narahari! (dhä dhä
dhi dhi tä ga dhennä sa sari gari ei tä iti ai ai a tennä ai ai)"
*
çärikä präha - mediné géte yathä jaya jagata vandiné,

vidita nåpa-nandiné, rädhikä candra vadané,
duùka mocané
çyäma manoraïjiné, dhairya bhara bhaïjiné, kaïja khaïjana ména gaïji
måga locané
"All glories to She who is praised by the whole world, the famous princess
Rädhikä with the moon-like face, the destroyer of misery! She enchants Çyäma's
mind, destroys His patience and Her eyes defeat the beauty of lotusflowers,
wagtailbirds, fishes and does!"
känti jita däminé,
parama abhiräminé, bhäminé sindhu-kanyädi mada mardhiné
maïju mådu häsiné, lalita kala bhäñiëé,
bhuvanamohiné,
lalitädi muda vardiné
"Her lustre defeats the lightning and is most pleasing, She is so powerful that She
can destroy the pride of the goddess of fortune and others, She smiles lovely and
sweetly, speaks lovely and inarticulate words, She enchants the world and increases
the joy of Her friends like Lalitä."
subhaga çåìgäriëé, nava nava vihäriné,
våndä vipina vinodiné, gaja gäminé.
räsa rasa raìgiëé,
madhura taraìgiëé,
sakala ramaëé maëi, narahari sväminé
jhäntä jhäà jhäntä tätthä vitakato thunnä dåmiki trigao takatä tä thaiyä,
17

[p.18]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

sari rigama pamaga mana gari säs säti ai tennä tennä tennäà ti täi ai ä
"She is beautifully decorated, She plays always fresh pastimes, She rejoices in
Våndävana, She walks as elegantly as an elephant, She enjoys the flavours of the Räsadance, She is a river of sweetness, She is the jewel of all women and She is the
mistress of Narahari Cakravarti" (jhäntä jhäà jhäntä tätthä vitakato thunnä dåmiki
trigao takatä tä thaiyä. sari rigama pamaga mana gari säs säti ai tennä tennä tennäà
ti täi ai ä).

18. ÇRÉ DÄSA GOSVÄMÉ READS LALITA MÄDHAVA:
lalita mädhava - vipralambha sémä yäte; pürve diyächilä raghunäthe äsvädite
grantha päöhe raghunätha divä niçi kände; hoilo unmäda duùke - dhairya nähi bände
kabhu düre rahe giyä grantha parihari; kabhu bhüme paòi rahe vakñe kori
khene khene nänä daçä hoy upasthita; sabe cintäyukta yabe hoyena mürcchita
çré rüpa gosvämé mone auñadha vicäri; däna keli kaumudé varëilä çéghra kori
raghunäthe kohe ihä koro äsvädana; pürva grantha deho more koribo çodhana
"(Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé) had previously given Raghunätha däsa his 'Lalitä
Mädhava', in which the limit of love-in-separation is experienced, to relish. When
Raghunätha read this book he wept day and night and he became almost mad of
misery, unable to remain calm. Sometimes he kept the book far away from himself,
and sometimes he fell to the ground, holding it to his chest. While weeping he
manifest different conditions of ecstatic love and when he fainted everyone present
became very worried. Çré Rüpa Gosvämé then thought of a medicine that could save
Raghunätha's life and he quickly wrote a book named Däna Keli Kaumudé (dealing
with the meeting of Rädhä and Kåñëa)1 , telling Raghunätha: "Why don't you relish
this? Give me the book I gave you before back, I have to proofread it still!"

19. MÄ JÄHNAVÄ'S STAY AT RÄDHÄKUËÒA
Eleventh Wave, verses 150-189
çré rädhikä kuëòa-väsé çré däsa gosäi; çuni harña hoilä—colibäre sädhya näi (150)
çré rüpa vicchede sadä adhairya hådaya; annädi vihane deha kñéëa atiçaya (151)
niyama nirväha yaiche ye ceñöa antare; se sab dekhite kär hiyä nä vidare (152)

11 That this book was especially written for Raghunätha däsa Gosvämé is proven by a verse

that appears in the end of the book, starting with the words rädhäkuëòa-taöé kuöéra vasatiù.

18

[p.19]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

"When, Çréla Raghunätha däs Gosvämé, who resided at Rädhikä-kuëòa, heard
that Mother Jähnavä had arrived in Vraja, he became very happy— but unfortunately
he was unable to go and see her. His heart was always agitated by feelings of
separation from Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé and he had given up all solid food. Consequently
his body had become greatly emaciated. Whose heart will not break by seeing how he
followed all his regulative duties?"
kåñëa däsa kaviräja ädi bahu jan; praëami yäite koilo ätma nivedane (153)
gopäla, räghava paëòitädi ek säthe; cole nandéçvara govardhanädi hoite (154)
sabe våndävane kori éçvaré darçana; jänäilä däsa gosväméra nivedana (155)

"Many great devotees like Kåñëa däsa Kaviräja Gosvämé went (to Mother Jähnavä)
to offer obeisances to her and surrender themselves to her. Gopäla, Räghava Paëòita
and others came together from Nandéçvara and Govardhana to Våndävana to see
Jähnavä Éçvaré. They all told her of Däsa Gosvämé's plea."
çré jähnavä éçvaréra ye hoilo antare; tähä vivariyä ke kohite çakti dhare? (156)
çré gopäla bhaööa ädi gosvämé sakale; jänäilä—çré kuëòa yäibo prätaù käle (157)
sabe kohe — çré kuëòädi koriyä darçana; çéghra kori ethä koriben ägamana (158)
çrama upaçama hoibek bhälo mate; tabe jäiben ban-bhramaëa korite (159)

"Who is able to describe the feelings within Çré Jähnavä Éçvaré's heart? She told
Çré Gopäla Bhaööa and all the other Gosvämés — "Tomorrow morning I will go to Çré
Rädhäkuëòa." They all replied: "Yes, quickly go to see Çré Rädhäkuëòa and other
places. After properly resting you can then go on a forest tour of Vraja."
ihä çuni çré éçvaré ullasita mone; colilen çré kuëòe veñöita vijïa gaëe (160)
çré kuëòete gelen bahulävana diyä; kuëòa çobhä dekhi' preme umaòaye hiyä (161)
raghunätha däsa gosväméra sthiti yathä; mone ei—täre giyä dekhiben tathä (162)
çré däsa gosvämé se nirjana kuëòa tére; korena çré näma grahaëädi dhére dhére (163)
kåñëa däs kaviräja agrete äsiyä; däsa gosväméra äge chilä däòäiyä (164)
avasara päiyä koroye nivedana; 'çré jähnavä éçvaréra hoilo ägamana' (165)

"Hearing this, Çré Éçvaré (Jähnavä) was very happy at heart and she went to
Rädhäkuëòa, surrounded by her wise and learned devotees. She went to Çré
Rädhäkuëòa through Bahulävana. Seeing the beauty of the kuëòa her heart was
startled with ecstatic love, and she thought: 'Let me go there where Çré Raghunätha
däsa Gosvämé is staying." Çré Däsa Gosvämé was softly chanting näma on a solitary bank
of the kuëòa when Kåñëadäs Kaviräja came before him and told him on the
opportune moment: 'Çré Jähnavä Éçvaré has come."
çuni ki adbhuta prema vyäpilo hådaye; ägusari cole açru yukta netra dvaye (166)

19

[p.20]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

çré éçvaré dekhe däsa gosvämé gamana; atiçaya kñéëa tanu, teja sürya-sama (167)
çré éçvaré antara bujhite kebä päre?; jhare dui netre väri—nivärite näre (168)

"When Çré Däsa Gosvämé heard this, such a wonderful prema pervaded his heart,
and he came forward with tear-filled eyes. Çré Éçvaré saw how Däsa Gosvämé walked,
how greatly emaciated his body was and how he shone like the sun. Who can
understand the heart of Çré Éçvaré? She could not stop the tears streaming from her
eyes."
çré däsa gosvämé praëamite dhairya dhari; koilo ye ucit premamayé çré éçvaré (169)
çré éçvaré äge däsa gosäi ye koy; tähä çuni kära vä nä vidare hådaya (170)
mädhava äcärya ädi sabära sahite; milane adbhuta prema uthalaye cite (171)
ki adbhuta açru-dhärä sabära nayane; sakalei sthira hoilen koto kñaëe (172)
äriö grämera vrajaväsé lokagaëa; sabe harña éçvaréra koriyä darçana (173)

"Çré Däsa Gosvämé calmed down and offered his obeisances unto Mother
Jähnavä. Loving Çré Éçvaré then did what was proper. Whose heart will not break after
hearing what Çré Éçvaré told Däsa Gosvämé? Däsa Gosvämé's heart also overflowed with
astonishing prema as he met with all the other devotees, like Mädhava Äcärya. What
wonderful streams of tears flowed from everyone's eyes! After a while everyone
calmed down. The Vrajaväsés from Ärét village (the present Rädhäkuëòa village) were
all very happy to see Jähnavä Éçvaré."
dina tina cäri rahi çré rädhäkuëòete; korilen päka kriyä parama yatnete (174)
kåñëe bhoga samarpiyä ulläsa antare; bùuïjäilä vrajaväsé vaiñëava sabäre (175)
prasäda sevane ye änanda premoday; kebä nä dekhite sädha kore se samaya (176)
çré jähnavä éçvaréra alaukika réti; ki bujhibo? mo chärera nähi buddhi gati (177)

"She stayed at Çré Rädhäkuëòa for three or four days, and very attentively cooked
there. With a blissful heart she offered her preparations to Kåñëa and then fed the
prasäda to all the Vrajaväsés and Vaiñëavas. Who was not fulfilled at that time by
seeing the ecstatic love that arose from the service (eating) of this prasäda? Who am I
to understand the extraordinary activities of Çré Jähnavä Éçvaré? The brain of a fool like
me cannot conceive of them."
eka dina madhyähna samaye kuëòa tére; çuni' se vaàçéra dhvani sthira hoite näre (178)
kautuka dekhilo se anya agocara; vijïe vistäribo e prasaìga manohara (179)
tathäpi kohiye kichu— éçvaré ulläse; vaàçé-dhvani çuniyä cähaye cäri päçe (180)

"One day at noontime Mother Jähnavä heard the sound of a flute on the bank of
Rädhäkuëòa and she could not remain calm anymore. She could perceive this
curiosity, but others couldn't. Still, for the realised devotees I will recount some of this

20

[p.21]
Excerpt from 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'

captivating narration. Hearing the flute-sound, Mother Jähnavä blissfully looked all
around."
kadambera tale dekhe çyäma cikaniyä; tribhaìga bhaìgimä koöi kandarpa jiniyä (181)
manda manda häsi' se madhura vaàçé räya; ke dhare dhairaya jäte jagat mätäy (182)
çré rädhikä lalitädi sakhégaëa-saìge; beòhiyäche çyamala sundare mahä raìge (183)
se adbhuta çobhä dekhi' jähnavä éçvaré; hoilä mürcchita yaiche kohite nä päri (184)

"At the base of a Kadamba-tree she saw glossy Çyämasundara, standing in a
threefold bending form, His beauty defeating that of millions of Cupids. Who in the
world would not be maddened at the sight of this slightly smiling, sweet flute-player?
Very blissfully Çré Rädhikä, Lalitä and the other sakhés stood surrounding this very
playful Çyämasundara. When Jähnavä Éçvaré saw this astonishing beauty she fainted in
a manner that I cannot describe."
koto kñaëe cetan päiyä sthira hoilä; nirjane e raìga—anye prakäça nä koilä (185)
jäiben çré govardhanädi darçanete; tähä jänäilä däsa gosvämé agrete (186)
çré däsa gosvämé bhüme poòi praëamiyä; dilä anumati dainye nimagna hoiyä (187)
çunite se dainya kära hiyä nä vidare?; ki kohibo éçvaréra ye hoilo antare (188)
paricärikädi madhye jähnavä éçvaré; kuëòa hoite govardhane gelä dhéri dhéri (189)

"After a short while she regained her composure and kept this curiosity to
herself, without revealing it to others. Then she went to Çréla Raghunätha däsa
Gosvämé and told him that she was going to have darçana of Govardhana and other
places. Çré Däsa Gosvämé fell to the ground and offered prostrated obeisances unto
her before granting her permission to leave, immersed in an ocean of humility as he
was. Whose heart will not break after hearing of this humility? And what can I say to
describe Éçvaré's heart? Thus Jähnavä Éçvaré slowly left Rädhäkuëòa to go to
Govardhana, surrounded by her servants."
Thus ends a selection from Çréla Narahari Cakravarti's 'Bhakti Ratnäkara'.
Translated by Advaitadäs © 1986-1996

21