[p.1]
Lives of the Saints Contents
Abhirama Gopala
Baladeva Vidyabhushana
Bhugarbha Goswami
Birchandra Prabhu
Devananda Pandit
Dhananjaya Pandit
Gadadhara dasa Thakur
Gangamata Goswamini
Gauridasa Pandit
Gopala Bhatta Goswami
Gopala Guru Goswami
Ishvara Puri Prabhu
Jagadish Pandit
Jagannatha das Babaji
Jahnava Mata
Jayadeva Goswami
Kaliya Krishna das
Lochan das Thakur
Lokanatha Goswami
Madhvacharya
Mahesh Pandit
Narahari Sarkar Thakur
Narottama Thakur
Nityananda Prabhu
Purushottam Thakur
Raghunandan Thakur
Raghunath Bhatta Goswami
Ramanujacharya
Ramchandra Kaviraj
Sanatana Goswami
Saranga Thakur

[p.2]
Shyamananda Prabhu
Sita Thakurani
Srivas Thakura
Svarup Damodar Goswami
Uddharan Dutta Thakur
Vrindavan das Thakur
Vakreshwar Pandit
Vamshivadananda Thakur
Vasudev, Madhava, and Govinda Ghosh
Vishnupriya-devi
Vishvanatha Cakravarti Thakur

Lives of the Saints: Chapter One
Shri Abhirama Gopal Thakura
Shri Abhirama Gopal Thakura was also known as Shri Rama Das. He was
a great devotee of Lord Nityananda. On the order of Shri Nityananda Prabhu, he
became a great acharya and preacher of Gaudiya Vaishnavism.He was a very
influential personality, and atheists and blasphemers were very much afraid of
him. Empowered by Shri Nityananda Prabhu, he was always in ecstasy and was
kind to all fallen souls. It is siad that if he offered obeisances to any stone other
than a shalagram-shila, it would immediately burst into pieces. According to
Gaura-Ganodesha-Dipika (12) in Krishna-lila he was Shridama, one of the 12
prominent boy cowherd friends of Shri Krishna. He was Nityananda's dearmost
devotee. Abhiram Gopal's wife's name was Shri Malini devi.
Abhirama Gopala Thakura lived in Khanakula Krishnanagara. Khanakula
Krishanagar may be visited by taking the narrow gauge train from Howrah Station
in Calcutta to Amta. It is located in the present Hooghly District of West Bengal.

[p.3]
There, in Khanakula Krishnanagara, near the bankof the Khana river, is the
temple of Abhirama Thakura. Because it is a town (nagara) with a Krishna
temple, the town is called Krishna-nagara, and because the temple is on the kula
(banks) of the Khana, it is called Khanakula-krishna nagara Just outside the temple
is a bakula tree. This place is known as Siddha-bakula-kunja. It is said that
Abhirama Thakura used to like sitting beneath this tree.
The story of how the Gopinath deity of Khanakula Krishnanagara was
established is as follows. One day, the deity of Gopinatha appeared to Abhiram
Gopal in a dream, and informed him that he wanted to manifest himself in
Khanakula Krishnanagara. It is said that he was buried in the earth, and that in the
dream he ordered Abhirama Gopal to excavate him and inaugurate his worship.
Abhirama Gopal went to the place where the Lord had indicated he would be
found, and began excavation. There, after digging for some time, he found the
mind-enchanting deity of Shri Gopinatha. The place where this discovery was
made is now called Rama kunda, and there is a small lake there. The Bhakti
Ratnakara says, "After having excavated the Gopinatha deity, all the devotees
headed by Rama Dasa (Abhirama Gopala) bathed in the sacred waters of the
kunda near the spot where the deity had been found. From that day on the kunda
became famous as Rama Kunda. Whoever bathes there becomes free from
repeated birth and death."
One day Shri Abhirama Gopala was overwhelmed with the ecstasy of
sakhya rasa, and had a desire to play the flute of a cowherd boy. Intoxicated by
the bliss of Krishna-prema, he began searching the four directions for a suitable
flute. As he searched through the forest for a suitable instrument all at once he saw
before him a big log. The log was so huge that sixteen men could not move it.
Grabbing hold of that log, he turned it into a flute and began to play upon it. The
Chaitanya Charitamrita says, "Rama dasa was one of the principle branches of the
Nityananda branch of the Chaitanya tree of bhakti. He was full of sakhyaprema—love of Krishna saturated with the mellow of friendship. He once picked
up a log that sixteen men couldn't lift and used it as a flute."
Shri Abhirama Thakura had a bullwhip that was imbued with divine

[p.4]
power. Its name was "Jayamangal." Whoever was struck with this whip became
filled with Krishna prema. One day Shrinivasa Acharya went to take darshan of
Abhiram Gopala. At that time, Abhiram Gopal touched him three times with
Jayamangal. The Thakur's good wife, Malini, cried out, "My Lord! Do not touch
him again. Calm yourself. Shrinivas is only a boy. If you touch him again he will
lose consciousness." As a result of coming in contact with the whip of Abhirama
Thakura, Shrinivasa Acharya became filled with Shri Krishna prema.
When Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu ordered Nityananda Prabhu to preach in
Bengal, he sent Abhirama Gopal and Gadadhara Das along with him. Simply upon
seeing Abhiram Gopal, atheists and blasphemers would flee in terror. He was a
remarkable scholar, well-versed in all the scriptures. He married his wife, Malini,
upon the order of Shri Nityananda Prabhu. His disappearance day is on the
seventh day of the dark moon in the month of Chaitra, and on that day a great
festival attended by thousands of devotees is held every year in KhanakulaKrishnanagara.
Lives of the Saints: Chapter Two
Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana
Shrimad Baladev Vidyabhusan Prabhu was a pure devotee of the highest
order, who cared for nothing but the service of the Lord. He didn't have a spot of
desire for name and fame. He was the composer of many scriptures which are as
priceless as precious gems, for the ultimate benefit of all those who have taken
human birth. The exact location of his birth, the names of his mother and father,
and their family tree is not known. The exact circumstances of his birth and
childhood are, therefore, unknown. Still, some are of the opinion that that he took
birth in a place called Baleshvara, a village neighboring Remuna, in the early part
of the 18th century A.D, as the son of a vaisya, an agriculturist. At an early age he

[p.5]
became learned in Sanskirt grammar, poetry, rhetoric, and logic. After becoming
expert in all these subjects, he began wandering to different places of pilgrimage.
After wandering about in this way for some time, and after visiting many holy
places, he happened to stay at a temple of the Tattvavadi followers of Shri
Madhvacharya. There, he became fluent in his understanding of the tattvavadasiddhanta, that is, the philosophical and theological conclusions of the followers of
Madhva. After this, he took sannyasa, and preached the tattvavada-siddhanta very
vigourously throughout the length and breadth of India.
As he wandered from one place to the next, he gradually came to
Jagannatha Puri. . There he remained and preached for a few days. At that time,
he chanced to meet one of the foremost disciples of Shri Rasikananda Deva,
Pandit Shri Radha-Damodara, with whom he discussed devotional principles. At
that time, Shrimad Radha-Damodara dev Goswami instructed Baladev on the
subject of Shri Gourasundara's pastimes of mercy and His teachings on Gaudiya
Vaishanva siddhanta to Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya. After hearing the divine
wisdom spoken by Shri Radha-Damodara Goswami, Baladeva's heart was deeply
moved. After a few days of hearing from him, he accepted initiation into the
Radha-Krishna mantra, and began studying the Sat-Sandarbhas of Jiva Goswami
at the holy feet of his gurudeva, Radha-Damodara Goswami.
After a short time, Baladeva became expert in the Gaudiya Vaishanva
siddhanta. After staying with Radha-Damodara Goswami for some time, he was
ordered to further his studies in Gaudiya Vaishnavism by going to Vrindavan and
taking shelter at the holy feet of Vishvanatha Cakravarti Thakura. After first

[p.6]
visiting Nabadwipa, he soon arrived in Vrindavan.
Shri Visvanatha Chakravarti Thakur (Shri Harivallabha dasa), was very
happy to see Baladeva's submission, modesty, learning, and renunciation. From
that day forward, for some time, he kept Baladeva by his side and taught him the
acintya-bheda-abheda philosophy of Shri Chaitanya and many other important
siddhantas related to the Gaudiya Vaishnava conception of Krishna-bhakti. From
this point on, Shri Baladeva's life and soul was fully dedicated to the theistic
conception of the Gaudiya Sampradaya. His mind was fixed on this, and with onepointed determination, he now began preaching this line to the exclusion of all
others.
One day, in Jaipur, in the royal court, the Ramanuja sampradaya began
arguing a case in connection with the Gaudiya sampradaya. They informed the
king that the Gaudiya sampradaya had no commentary on the most important
revealed scripture of Vedic religion—Vedanta; therefore they had no siddhanta
and no real sampradaya, or school. As a consequence they should give up their
service of the deities of Govinda and Gopinatha, and entrust with those who were
bona fide members of a genuine sampradaya. At that time, the king of Jaipura was
a follower of the Gaudiya sampradaya. He immediately sent word of the
controversy by messenger to Vishvanatha Cakravarti Thakur in Vrindavan,
wanting to know if the Gaudiya sampradaya actually did have any commentary on
theVedanta. If there was, the king wanted that the commentary be sent
immediately to Jaipur to satisfy the scrutiny of the pandits from the Ramanuja
Sampradaya.

[p.7]
At this time, Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti was very old and infirm. It was
impossible for him to make the arduous journey to Jaipur. He sent his student and
disciple, Shri Baladev, in his place. Baladeva Vidyabhusan was an expert scholar
in all the important scriptures. In the midst of a huge assembly of pandits from the
Ramanuja sampradaya, Baladeva challenged them all to argue with him in
scholarly debate. A long, and hard-fought debate took place, with tumultuous
arguing from the Ramanuja school. Still, none of them could stand before his
conclusive statements, keen scholarship, and penetrating intellect. Baladeva
argued that the founder of the Gaudiya Sampradaya, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
established the Shrimad-Bhagavatam as the topmost commentary on Vedanta.
The Bhagavatam itself claims that it is bhashyanam brahma-sutranam, the natural
commentary on Vedanta. This is confirmed on the basis of evidence given by Jiva
Goswami in his Sat Sandarbha. Therefore, the Gaudiya sampradaya has chosen to
accept Shrimad-Bhagavatam as the original commentary on Vedanta, and sees no
need for a separate commentary.
At that point, the pandits from the Ramanuja sampradaya shouted: "He
admits that there is no commentary! They have no commentary!" Having no other
recourse, Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusan promised to show them the Gaudiya
commentary on Vedanta within a few days. The pandits were astonished to think
that such a thing existed. They were suspicious that this might be some kind of
trick, but were silenced for the time being.
Very troubled within his mind, Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana went to the
temple of Shri Govinda, the deity of Rupa Goswami. After offering his eightfold

[p.8]
obeisances before the deity, he related everything that had taken place. That night
in a dream, Shri Govinda told him, you must compose the commentary. That
commentary will be personally sanctioned by me. No one will be able to find any
fault in it. Seeing this in his dream, Baladeva became very happy, and his heart
was full of strength, ready for the task at hand. After this, he meditated on the
lotus feet of Govinda and began writing his commentary. Within a few days it
was completed. This commentary became known as the Govinda Bhashya
commentary on Vedanta.
In an addendum appended to the Govinda Bhashya, after it was published,
Shri Baladeva has written, vidyarupam bhushanam ye pradaya, khatim nitye teno
yo mamudarah, Shri govinda-svapna-nirdishtha bhashye, radhabandhurangah sa
jiyat. "May Shri Govinda be all glorious. By his mercy, he revealed this
commentary to me in a dream. The commentary revealed by him is especially
appreciated by the highly learned, and as a result of this I have been given the
name Vidyabhushan, but it is Shri Govinda who deserves all credit. May that Shri
Govinda who is the most dear life and soul of Shri Radhika, be all-victorious."
With the Govinda Bhashya commentary in hand, Baladeva Vidyabhushan
arrived at the assembly hall of the king, where the pandits were waiting for him.
When he showed them his commentary, they were speechless. The Gaudiya
sampradaya was proclaimed victorious. The king and all the Gaudiya Vaishnavas
were supremely happy. At that time the pandits gave Shri Baladeva the name
"Vidyabhushana," or one whose ornament is knowledge, in honor of his great
scholarship. The year was 1628, Shaka era. From the day forward, the king of

[p.9]
Jaipur decreed, everyone would attend the aroti of Shri Govinda, the deity beloved
by the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, who was ultimately responsible for such a wonderful
commentary on Vedanta.
The Ramanuja pandits, falling under the influence of Shri Baladeva
Vidyabhusana, accepted him as their acharya and wanted to become his disciples.
With great humility, Baladeva Vidyabhushana refused, explaining that there are
four sampradayas, among which the Shri Sampradaya is a genuine school that
preaches servitude to God as the best religious process. By advancing the views of
the Gaudiya sampradaya, he meant no disrespect to the Shri sampradaya. To
insult the Shri sampradaya would be a great offense, he said.
Shripad Baladeva Vidyabhushan returned from Jaipur to Vrindavan
carrying the message of his victory. Upon returning, he submitted to the lotus feet
of Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura and told him the news. All the visiting
Vaishnavas and the residents of Vrindavan were delighted, and Vishvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura bestowed his blessings upon Baladeva Vidyabhusana.
After this, Baladeva Vidyabhusana began writing a commentary on the Sat
Sandarbha. Soon Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura passed away, and the
Vaishnava community felt as if a great beacon of divine light had been
extinguished. At that time, Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusan became regarded among
the Vaishnava community as the keeper of the flame, the leader among those who
understood the teachings of Shri Chaitanya.
In his teachings, Baladeva establishes the transcendental position of the
Vedas, and then argues that they are the best evidence for knowing the supreme

[p.10]
truth. In his Siddhanta-darpana, Baladeva has explained the position of
transcendental sound in relationship to Krishna and his holy name as follows:
ekameva pram tattvam vachyavachaka bhavabhak
vachyah sarveshvaro devo vachakah pranavobhavet
matsya-kurma-adibhir-rupair-yatha vachyo bahur-bhavet
vachako'pi tatharthadi-bhavadbahur-udiryate
adyantarahitatvena svayam nityam prakirtite
avirbhava tirobhavau syatamasya yugeyuge
"The one absolute truth has two categories: the named (Krishna) and the
name (Om). Parameshvara, Shri Krishna, the absolute person is the named;
pranava, or omkara (Om) is the name. The named, or Parameshvara Shri Krishna,
reveals himself in different forms as Matsya, Kurma, and many other forms. In the
same way the name of the Supreme Lord expands into many different forms; such
as the transcendental syllable Om, the gayatri mantram, and the Vedas themselves.
There is no limit to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; he has no beginning and
no end. As a consequence, his glorification is also eternal. He appears within this
material world, stays for some time, and again disappears according to his own
sweet will."
Baladev explains the potency of Godhead in his Siddhanta-darpana: "The
Lord has three potencies—thinking (jnana) feeling (kriya) and willing (bala).
Through these three potencies he causes the material creation to come into being.
The rays of consciousness emanating from him—the jiva souls—are his separated
parts and parcels. By his thinking, feeling, and willing, they too come into being.

[p.11]
The Vedas are spoken by the Lord, who is all-perfect. The Vedas are therefore
free from the four defects of material existence: error, cheating, illusion, and
imperfect perception. And so, the Vedas are the perfect form of evidence for
understanding the Supreme Truth. The Vedas glorify Krishna as the absolute
truth. The Puranas and Itihasas are as good as the Vedas. They too glorify
Krishna as the absolute truth."
In his Vedanta-samantaka, Baladev has expanded on this thesis of the
Vedas being the best evidence for understanding the Supreme Godhead. There he
says: tadevam sarvatah shreishtha shabdasya sthite tattvanirnayakastu
shrotilakshana eva na tvarshalakshanopi. "There are different ways of knowing
what is truth: pratyaskha,direct perception, anuman, inference, hypothesis, and
deduction, shabda, the words of the authorities arthapati, interpretation,
anupalabdhi, negative inference, sambhava, the laws of probability, and aitihya,
history. Of all these methods of arriving at truth, shabda, hearing from
authorities, is best. The best source of knowledge about the absolute is the shruti:
revealed truth received from Vedic authority. Different scholars always entertain
different opinions about reality, but the Vedic shastras are eternal and
transcendental, moreover they are free from the four defects of material existence,
having sprung directly from the Supreme Lord Himself. therefore they are the best
evidence for knowing the absolute truth. " (Vedanta Samantaka 1/51)
What has been proved on the basis of solid evidence, pramana, is called
prameya. Baladev has written a book called Prameya Ratnavali, in which he states
nine principles that he has established are facts, proven by the incontrovertible

[p.12]
evidence of the Vedas. The teachings of Madhva-Gaudiya Vaishnavism as it has
descended from Madhvacharya to Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu have been
summarised in the Prameya Ratnavali. His nine principles are stated in the
following verse (PR 8):
shri madvhah praha vishnum paratamam akhilamnaya vedyam ca cisvam
satyam bhedam ca jivam hari carana jusas tartamyam ca tesham
moksham vishnv-anghri-labham tad-amala-bhajanam tasya hetum pramanam
pratyaksadi trayam cety upadisati hari krsna-caitanya chandra
"Shri Madhvacaharya taught that:
1) Krishna, who is known as Hari is the Supreme Lord, the Absolute.
2) That Supreme Lord may be known through the Vedas.
3) The material world is real.
4) The jivas, or souls, are different from the Supreme Lord.
5) The jivas are by nature servants of the Supreme Lord.
6) There are two categories of jivas: liberated and illusioned.
7) Liberation means attaining the lotus feet of Krishna, that is, entering into an
eternal relationship of service to the Supreme Lord.
8) Pure devotional service is the cause of this relationship.
9) The truth may be known through direct perception, inference, and Vedic
authority. These very principles were taught by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu."
According to Baladeva there are five categories of tattvas or truths which
constitute reality: ishvara, God; jiva, soul; prakriti, matter; kala, time; and karma,
action. Ishvara, or God, is the greatest. He is all-knowing, he is the utmost

[p.13]
realization of transcendental bliss, and his very nature is ecstasy. He is full in all
qualities and is the absolute person. He is the master of everything, and is eternally
free from birth and death. He is the master of all the gods headed by Brahma and
Shiva. He is the supreme husband, the Lord of lords, and the Supreme Person, the
worthiest of receiving prayers. He alone remains as the absolute truth even after
this material world (which is his separated material energy) is destroyed along
with all the demigods such as Brahma, Shiva, and Indra.
Baladeva further explains that Krishna has three energies, parashakti,
kshetrajna-shakti, and maya-shakti. Parashakti means svarupa-shakti, or the Lord's
internal potency. Kshetrajna-shakti means jiva-shakti, or the living beings, and
maya-shakti means the Lord's external potency, his potency for keeping the souls
in illusion. This explanation is on the basis of the Vishnu Purana. He goes on to
explain that there is no difference between the body and soul of God. They are one
and the same. As Krishna, the Supreme Lord has two hands, he plays a flute, he
has a transcendental form of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and he is known by
the names Govinda and Gopal. Lakshmidevi is nondifferent from him, in that he
is the Supreme Energetic and She is His Supreme Energy. (sei jaganmata lakshmi
vishnur anapayini shakti) This confirmed throughout the shastra. Whatever form
the lord appears in, there is a corresponding Lakshmi form who acts as his eternal
consort. When the Lord appears as a god, Lakshmi appears as a goddess. When
the Lord advents as an ordinary human being, Lakshmi also descends upon this
earth as an ordinary human being. Baladeva Vidyabhushan says: teshu sarveshu
lakshmi-rupeshu radhayah svayam laksmitvam mantavyam sarveshu bhagavad-

[p.14]
rupeshu krishnasya svayam bhagavatvavat: (Vedanta-samantaka 2.37) Of all the
manifestations of Lakshmidevi, Shrimati Radharani is the Supreme Goddess, just
as amongst so many avatars of Godhead, Krishna is the supreme Personality of
Godhead. This is confirmed in the Brihad-Gautamiya Tantra,which states, "Shri
Radhika is the Supreme Goddess. Her very nature is Krishna, for her very
existence is permeated by Krishna. Therefore she is known as Krishnamayi, or
one who is full of Krishna. She is known as Paradevata, for she is the Supreme
Goddess. All other goddesses are subordinate to her. She is the Supreme Lakshmi
and her transcendental effulgence surpasses all conceptions of brilliance. She is
the supreme enchantress, for she enchants Krishna Himself, who is capable of
charming millions of cupids."
Baladev cites Shaunaka Muni who says in Shrimad-Bhagavatam that of all
the avatars, expansions of Godhead, and Personalities of Godhead, Krishna is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The worship of Krishna, must therefore be
regarded as the highest form of worship.
According to Baladeva, the jiva souls are the atomic spiritual energy of the
Lord. The souls are eternal and can never be destroyed by any means. The soul's
true eternal nature is to be filled with transcendental knowledge: sa ca jivo
bhagavadaso mantavyah dasabhuto harereva nanyasyaive kadacaneti padmat
(Vedanta-samantaka 3.11) "It is the constitutional nature of the soul to be a
servant of Bhagavan Shri Krishna. It is the version of the Padma-Purana that the
soul is an eternal servant of Hari, and has no other genuine position." By surrender
to the lotus feet of a spiritual master who is a devotee of Krishna,one attain

[p.15]
Krishna-bhakti by the guru's mercy. Upon attaining Krishna-bhakti one gets
Krishna Himself.
In His Vedanta-samantaka, Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana offers the
following prayer to the lotus feet of his gurudeva, Shri Radha-Damodara
Goswami:
radhadidamodara nama vibhrata,
viprena vedantamayah syamantaka
shri radhikayairviniveditomaya
tasyah pramodam sa tanotu sarvada
Having been deputed to do so by my gurudeva, the brahmana named Shri RadhaDamodara Goswami, I have compiled this commentary on the Vedanta known as
Vedanta-syamantaka for the sake of Shrimati Radharani's pleasure. This
commentary is a summary of the important points of Vedanta. May it be pleasing
to Shri Radhika.
Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana had two superexcellent disciples who were
perfected souls. Their names were Shri Uddhava Dasa and Shri Nandana Mishra.
Among the books compiled by Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana were as follows:
His commentary on Vedanta called the Govinda-bhashya; the "jewel of
conclusions" or Siddhanta Ratna; Sahitya Kaumudi; a summary of Vedanta
philosophy known as Vedanta Syamantaka; the "jewel of factual principles"
(outline the nine principles held in common by both the Madhva and Chaitanya
schools) known as Prameya Ratnavali; a summary of Gaudiya Vaishnava
principles called the Siddhanta Darpana; the Kavya Kaustubha (a book of selected

[p.16]
Sanskrit verses for Vaishnavas); the Aishvarya Kadambini; Vyakarana Kaumudi
(a book on grammar); Padakaustubha (selected prayers); commentaries on
important Upanishads beginning with the Isha Upanishad and including the
Gopala Tapani Upanishad; a commentary on Bhagavad-gita known as
Gitabhushana Bhashya; as well as commentaries on: Vishnu-Sahasra-nama,
Shrimad-Bhagavatam (Vaishnava-nandini-tika), Jiva Goswami's TattvaSandarbha, Rupa Goswami's Stavamala, Nata-chandrika, Jayadeva Goswami's
Chandraloka, his own Sahitya Kaumudi, Laghu-bhagavatamrita, NatakaChandrika, and Shyamananda Shataka. Shri Baladeva Vidyabhusana
disappeared in the Christian year 1768.

Lives of the Saints: Chapter Three
Bhugarbha Goswami

Just as there is very little mentioned in the scriptures about the life of Ûrila
Lokanatha Gosvami, in the same way, there is little written about his dear friend
Ûrila Bhugarbha Gosvami. Ûrila Lokanatha and Ûri Bhugarbha Gosvami were of
one heart and mind. On the order of Caitanya Mahaprabhu they went to live in
Vrndavana. Bhugarbha Gosvami was a disciple of Gadadhara Paõdita. Among his
disciples were Ûri Govindadev’s pujari Caitanya dasa, as well as Mukundananda
Cakravarti, Premi Krsnadasa and others.
Ûri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Gosvami writes: The eleventh branch of
Gadadhara Gosvami was Bhugarbha Gosvami and the twelfth was Bhagavata

[p.17]
dasa. Both of them went to Vrndavana and resided there for life.” Ûri
Kavikarõapura writes in his Gaura-gaõodesa-dipika that Bhugarbha Gosvami was
formerly the gopi named Prema Manjari in Vrndavana. While in Vrndavana,
Bhugarbha Gosvami passed away and entered into the unmanifest pastimes of the
Lord on the fourteenth day of the full moon in the month of Kartika.
Lokanatha Gosvami and Bhugarbha Gosvami lived together in Vrndavana
as one. Ûrila Narahari Cakravarti Thakura writes about them in his Bhaktiratnakara: Bhugarbha Gosvami and Lokanatha Gosvami were world-preachers;
they were so close and affectionate to one another that they were like one body.”
In Vrndavana, Bhugarbha Gosvami and Lokanatha Gosvami were regarded
as among the principle Gosvamis, as they were senior by age and experience to
many. The foremost among the subsequent followers of Rupa Gosvami,
Narottama dasa Thakura, writes about Bhugarbha Gosvami, with whom he had
much affectionate association: O Hari! Why am I addicted to this abominable
path of karma? I didn’t worship Radha-Krsna in Vraja even one iota, nor could I
understand the position of spontaneous devotion—raga-marga. Svarupa
Damodara, Sanatana Gosvami, Raghunatha Bhatta, Raghunatha dasa, Gopala
Bhatta Gosvami, Bhugarbha Gosvami, Jiva Gosvami, and Lokanatha Gosvami—I
never offered a drop of service to their lotus feet. How then shall I attain the goal
of life? Krsnadasa Kaviraja is among the most exalted rasika-bhaktas, devotees
whose sole interest is in relishing the mellows of devotion to Radha-Govinda and
Mahaprabhu. He compiled the Caitanya-caritamrta which describes the pastimes
of Ûri Caitanya and the Govinda-lilamrta, describing the pastimes of Radha-

[p.18]
Krsna. Hearing the pastimes of Gaura-Govinda would melt even stone, but it had
no effect on my consciousness. Not only have I failed to take advantage of the
association of all these great souls, but I have also neglected their associates and
followers. What a sad story my life has become. My life and birth are all useless.
Shame on me. Alas, alas. Thus laments Narottama das.
Lives of the Saints: Chapter Four
Shri Birchandra Prabhu
Shrimad Birchandra or Birabhadra Prabhu took birth within this world on
the ninth day of the dark moon in the month of Kartik, which corresponds to the
divine appearance day of Shri Shrimad Bhakti Raksaka Shridhar Maharaja. Shri
Krishna das Kaviraja Goswami writes (CC Adi 11.8-12):
"Shri Nityananda Prabhu is the topmost branch of the indestructible tree of eternal
love of Godhead, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu...From that branch grow many
branches and sub-branches...After Nityananda Prabhu, the greatest branch is
Birbhadra Goswami (Birchandra Prabhu)...although Birabhadra Prabhu was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He presented Himself as a great devotee. And
although the Supmre Godhead is transcendental to all Vedic injunctions, He
strictly followed the Vedic rituals. He is the main pillar in the hall of devotional
service erected by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. He knew within Himself that He
acted as the Supreme Lord Vishnu, but externally He was prideless. It is by the
glorious mercy of Shri Birchandra Prabhu that people all over the world now have
the chance to chant the names of Chaitanya and Nityananda. I therefore take
shelter of the lotus feet of Shri Birchandra Prabhu so that by His mercy my great
desire to write Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita will be properly guided."
In his anubhashya commentary on Chaitanya Charitamrita, Shri
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura describes the life of Birchandra Prabhu. He
writes that Birchanrda Prabhu, also known as Virabhadra Goswami was the son of

[p.19]
Nityananda Prabhu and the disciple of Jahnava Mata. He was born from the
womb of Shri Vasudha, Nityananda Prabhu's other wife. In the Gaura-GanodeshaDipika, he is mentioned as an incarnation of Kshirodakshayi Vishnu as follows:
sankarshanashya yo vyuha, payobdhishayi-namakah, sa eva virachandro'bhuchaitanya-abhinna vigraha: " Shri Sankarshan Dev expands Himself as
Kshirodakshayi Vishnu. His avatara is Birchandra Prabhu. He is nondifferent from
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, in that he is Vishnu-tattva, God Himself." In a
village of the name Jhamatapura in the district of Hugali, Birchandra Prabhu had a
disciple named Yadundanacharya, who had two daughters—his own daughter by
birth, Shrimati, and a foster daughter named Narayani. Both these daughters
married Birchandra. The marriage of Birchandra Prabhu has been mentioned in
the Bhakti Ratnakara of Shri Narahari Chakravarti Thakura as follows:
"Near Rajabol Hatta is Jhamatpura. Shri Jahnava Mata went there to the temple of
one of her disciples. There, lived the brahmana Yadunandan Acharya. By the
mercy of Shri Jahanva Mata he was endowed with great devotion. Yadunandana
had a wife named Lakshmi. It was said that she was a pure and highly religous
wife. They had two daughters—Shrimati and Narayani. Their bodily beauty was
wonderful beyond compare. Upon the wish of Jahnava Mata that fortunate
brahman gave his two daughters to be wed to Birchandra Prabhu."
Shri Yadunandana Acharya was a disciple of Birchandra Prabhu. Shrimati and
Narayani were given mantra initiation by Jahnava Mata. Shri Vasudha's daughter
was Gangadevi. She was an avatar of Gangadevi herself. She was wed to Shri
Madhava Acharya, who was an avatara of Shantanu Maharaja. The Mahabharat
celebrates Shantanu Maharaja, the father of Bhishmadev in Dwapara-yuga, as the
husband of Gangadevi herself. Madhava Acharya was a great devotee who was
deep in Krishna-prema.
On the order of his mother, Shri Birchandra Prabhu made a pilgrimage to
Shri Vrindavana Dhama. First he visited the home of Uddharana Datta Thakura in
Saptagrama. Uddharana Datta Thakura's son, Shrinivasa Datta Thakura greeted
Birchandra Prabhu with a respectful reception, and Birchandra Prabhu stayed there
for two days. From there, he went to Shantipura where he visited the house of Shri

[p.20]
Advaita Acharya. Advaita Acharya's son Shri Krishna Mishra cordially welcomed
Birchandra Prabhu with a full reception, and there was sankirtan, in which
everyone was drowned by the sweet waves of the holy name. From there,
Birchandra Prabhu went to Ambika Kalna, where he visited the home of Shri
Gauridasa Pandit. Shri Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu met him there with great
warmth and affection. From Ambika Kalna Birchandra Prabhu went to Nabadwipa
dhama to the house of Shri Jagannatha Mishra. Seeing the son of Nityananda
Prabhu, all the followers of Shri Chaitanya who were present there were
overjoyed, and welcomed him with great happiness. There he stayed for two days,
after which he traveled on to Shri Khanda. There he was met by Shri
Raghuanndana and Shri Kanai Thakura who received him affectionately and
embraced him. After staying there for some time, he continued on to Yajigrama to
visit the house of Shrinivasa Acharya. With great devotion, Shrinivasa Acharya
offered puja to Shri Birchandra Prabhu, knowing him to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. There he stayed for some days, and there was a great
sankirtan festival there. After this, Birchandra Prabhu went on to Kanthak Nagara,
near Katwa, where Mahaprabhu took sannyasa. After staying there for a day, he
continued on to Badhuri Gram, where he arrived at the house of Govinda Kaviraja.
With great devotion, the advanced Vaishnava, Govinda Kaviraja gave him a
respectful reception and worshiped him with puja. Being very please with his great
devotion, Birchandra Prabhu stayed at his house for two days. After this, he
visited Kheturi Gram, the hometown of Narottama Thakura. This is all recorded in
the Bhaktiratnakara: "To increase Shri Narottama Thakura's bliss beyond
measure, That important branch of the Shri Chaitanya tree, Shri Birchandra
Prabhu came to Kheturi Gram. danced in sankirtan. At that time, countless
people came to see Shri Birchandra Prabhu, who is Vishnu Himself."
After staying in Kheturi Gram for some days in a great festival of
sankirtan, Birchandra Prabhu continued on his way to Vrindavana. By his
influence, many sinners and atheists were delivered on the path. When he reached
Vrindavana, being informed of his auspicious arrival, and wishing to welcome
him as soon as he arrived, the important devotees in Vrindavan waited for him on
the road. These devotees were all great souls, and included Shri Jiva Goswami,
Shrimad Krishna dasa Kaviraja Goswami, as well as Shri Ananta Acharya and

[p.21]
Shri Hari dasa Pandita, who were Shri Gadadhara Pandit's disciples and the pujaris
of the deity of Shri Madana-Mohan. Shri Krishna Dasa Brahmachari, Shri
Gopinatha Adhikari, and Shri Madhu Pandita were also there, as was the pujari of
Shri Gopinatha, Bhavananda. Kashishvara and his disciples Shri Govinda
Goswami (the pujari of Shri Govinda in Vridnavan) and Shri Yadava Acharya
were also there as well as many others.
Bhakti Ratnakara says, "Everyone came out to see Birchandra Prabhu, and
all the residents of Vrindavana were delighted to take His darshan. There was no
one who was not overwhelmed by the seeing the manner of ecstatic bhakti
exhibited by Birchandra Prabhu. He sang of the superlative qualities of
Vrindavana and all the Vaishanvas there. After this he visited the deities of Shri
Govinda, Shri Gopinatha, and Shri Madana Mohana and took darshan of their holy
forms.
After this, on the order of Shri Jiva Goswami and Shri Bhugarbha Goswami,
Birchandra Prabhu wandered throughout the forests of Vrindavan on an extensive
pilgrimage. He saw the twelve forests of Vrindavan, Radha Kunda, Shyama
Kunda, and Govardhana Hill. And as he saw these things, he exhibited amazing
and wonderful manifestations of divine love. All the residents of Vrindavana were
enchanted by seeing these demonstrations of ecstasy in Krishna-bhakti. In this
way, after gradually visiting all the important holy places in Vrindavanaf, Shri
Birchandra Prabhu returned to Gaudadesha. After these wonderful expressions of
divine love by Birchandra Prabhu, his fame was preached far and wide. His divine
opulences were nondifferent from those of Nityananda Prabhu.
Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Saratswati Thakura, in his anubhasya commentary,
writes that Birchandra Prabhu had three disciples who are regarded as his
sons—Gopijana-vallabha, Ramakrishna, and Ramachandra. The youngest,
Ramachandra, belonged to the Sandilya dynasty and had the surname Varavyala.
He established his family at Khoradoha, and its members are known as the
goswamis of Khoradoha. His eldest disciple, Gopijana-vallabha, was a resident of
a village known as Lata near the Manakara railway station in the district of
Burdwan. The second, Ramakrishna, lived near Malda in a village named

[p.22]
Gayeshpura. Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura notes that since these three
disciples belonged to different dynasties and also had different surnames and lived
in different places, it is not possible to accept them as real sons of Virachandra
Prabhu.
Birchandra Prabhu's youngest disciple, Ramchandra had four sons, of
whom the eldest was Radha-madhava, whose third son was named Yadavendra.
Yadavendra's son was Nandakirshora, his son was Nidhikrishna, his son was
Chaitanyachand, his son was Krishna Mohan, his son was Jaganmohana, his son
was Vrajanatha, and his son was Shyamalal Goswami.

Lives of the Saints
Devananda Pandit

Devananda Pandita lived in Nabadwipa-dhama, in the section known as
Kuliya, or Koladwipa (near where the present-day Sri Caitanya Saraswata Math of
Srila Sridhara Maharaja is now located). Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu used him to
manifest the glories of Srimad-Bhagavatam to the world. Devananda Pandita was
highly renowned for his expertise in considering the sayings of SrimadBhagavatam. Many people used to go and study the Srimad-Bhagavatam under
him.
One day Srivasa Pandita went to hear the Srimad-Bhagavatam class given
by Devananda Pandita. After some time, Devananda began giving his lecture. He
was surrouned on all four sides by his students, who listened carefully to his
reading. Srivasa Pandita was a highly exalted rasika bhakta, a devotee experienced
in tasting the mellows of devotion. Hearing the sweetness of the verses of the

[p.23]
Srimad-Bhagavatam, Srivasa Thakura fell to the ground with tears of ecstasy in
his eyes. Weeping and wailing with tears of ecstasy in his eyes, he began rolling
on the ground with his voice choked up with emotion. Seeing all this, the students
of Devananda said, "This man is mad. He is not properly giving his attention to the
Srimad-Bhagavatam. Throw him out! Eject him!" In this way, the foolish
followers of Devananda, who were devoid of knowledge. Devananda Pandita saw
all this, but did nothing to prevent his disciples from ejecting Srivasa Pandita from
the class. If a disciple commits a sin as a result of the guru's ignorance, the guru
partakes of the sinful reaction. Therefore Devananda Pandita also partook of the
sinful reaction of offending Srivasa Pandita. Without saying a word of this to
anyone, and without telling anyone of his suffering at the hands of Devananda
Pandita, Srivasa Thakura returned home. All these events took place before the
advent of Sri Gauranga Mahaprabhu.
At length, the advent of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took place, as the
Supreme Lord made his appearance within this material world. Gradually he
manifest his childhood pastimes, his studies, his pastimes of learning, and his
pastimes as a young professor, as well as the revelation of his divinity in the house
of Srivasa Thakura. At the time of that divine manifestation, when the Lord
revealed his Mahaprakasa in the temple of Srivasa Thakura amidst all the
devotees, he told Srivasa, "Srivasa! Don't you remember the time when you went
to hear Srimad-Bhagavatam at the house of Devananda Pandita? When you fell to
the ground in ecstasy upon hearing the nectarine verses of the Bhagavatam, then
the disciples of Devananda—as a result of his ignorance of your exalted

[p.24]
devotion—threw you out of the class. At that time you went home, feeling
distressed, but you told no one of the incident. Do you remember this?" Hearing
the words of the Lord, Srivasa was astonished and fell at his lotus feet, catching
hold of them.
One day, as Mahaprabhu was wandering through the towns of Nabadwipa,
he came upon the road near where Sarvabhauma's father, Mahesvara Visarada
Pandit used to live. There was the house of Devananda Pandita. And at that time,
within the house of Devananda Pandita a class on Srimad-Bhagavatam was being
held. From a long way off, Caitanya Mahaprabhu could hear this. Upon hearing
Devananda's Bhagavatam class, Mahaprabhu became enraged. Caitanya
Bhagavata records: "With sharp words, the Lord said, 'What does this fellow know
about the meaning described by the Bhagavatam? He will never know the
Bhagavatam even in many lifetimes. The Srimad-Bhagavatam is the literary
avatara of Krsna Himself. The Bhagavatam promotes bhakti as the ultimate goal
of life. The Srimad-Bhagavatam is the essence of the four Vedas; it is the literary
form of divine love. The four Vedas are like milk; the Srimad-Bhagavatam is like
butter. Sukadeva Goswami is the churner of the butter, which was eaten by
Pariksita Maharaja. That Sukadeva Goswami, who is dear to me, knows the
meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam. In the Srimad-Bhagavatam, Sukadeva expressed
the truths about Myself; he expressed my own opinions. Me and My servants are
glorified in the Srimad-Bhagavatam; one who finds a difference between Myself
and My servants will find all his good intelligence destroyed. An irreligious
person who rejects bhakti and finds some other meaning in the Srimad-

[p.25]
Bhagavatam will never understand the Bhagavatam."
After saying all these things in an angry mood, Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
began to flee away from the house of Devananda Pandita, which he considered
condemned. The devotees caught hold of him and begged him not to go. The Lord
again said, "All the scriptures sing of the Srimad-Bhagavatam as being highly
mysterious, inconceivable. It cannot be understood by vast learning or powerful
austerity. One who attempts to know the Srimad-Bhagavatam through scholarship
will never understand it. One who recognizes that the Bhagavatam is nondifferent
from the inconceivable Supreme Controller knows that the essence of the
Bhagavatam can be known only through devotion and not through scholarship."
"One who understands that Srimad-Bhagavatam is Krsna Himself can
understand Srimad-Bhagavatam. One can only understand the Bhagavatam's
meaning through divine love. If one wants to understand this he must served both
the book Bhagavata and the devotee Bhagavata."
In this way, Mahaprabhu spoke many different truths to his followers and
then returned to his own home, accompanied by the devotees. From far away,
Devananda Pandita could hear all these different instructions. But at the time, he
did not pay any mind to all this.
After some time, Caitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa and went to
Jagannatha Puri. At that time, Devananda remembered the instructions the Lord
had given. He began to think, "Such a great person as this came near my
residence, and I did not get to meet him? I could not understand the glories of such
a great and exalted Personality as Caitanya Mahaprabhu who was filled with krsna-

[p.26]
prema?
One day in Kuliya, or Koladwipa as it is now known, Sri Vakresvara
Pandita went to visit the house of a devotee. That evening Vakresvara Pandita was
absorbed in kirtana and dancing. Hearing the news of this, people gathered from
all around to take part in the kirtana. As the night went on, more and more
devotees began arriving there. Hearing this news, Devananda Pandita could not
maintain his steadiness. He also hurried to the place where the kirtana was going
on. Seeing the empowered figure of Vakresvara Pandita and hearing his sweet
kirtana Devananda Pandita was astonished. He stood transfixed for what seemed
like hours. As the night wore on, the crowd grew and, in attempts to push forward
and see the dancing of Vakresvara Pandita, it became boisterous and rowdy. At
that time, Devananda Pandita, with a cane in his hand, held the crowd back and
quieted the mob. When Vakresvara Pandita, after dancing and dancing, fell to the
ground overwhelmed by ecstasy, Devananda Pandita carefully picked him up and
held him on his lap. With his own scarf, Devananda wiped the dust from the holy
body of Vakresvara Pandita. In this way, it was on that day that Devananda
Pandita began his bhakta-seva, his service to devotees.
One day, five years after he took sannyasa, Sri Caitanya Mahpaabhu
returned to Nabadwipa-dhama from Jagannatha Puri. Upon his return the devotees
felt that their lives had returned. Their joy knew no bounds. In order to see the
lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu thousands of people gathered there.
Whoever had previously committed offenses to the lotus feet of the Lord when he
had manifested his lila in Nabadwipa was eager to be forgiven. They all came

[p.27]
there to beseech the Lord's forgiveness for whatever offenses they might have
committed. At that time, in the place known today as the aparadha-bhanjanam, or
the place of amnesty (where Srila Sridhara Maharaja now has his temple), Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu granted forgiveness to all who gathered there and instructed
them in the science of devotion.
At that time, Devananda Pandita took darsana of the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Offering his obeisances unto the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
at a distance, Devananda cowered and shrank away from the Lord, standing off to
one side. At that time the Lord saw him and said, "You are the servant of my dear
devotee Vakresvara Pandita. By your service to him you have greatly pleased Me.
As a result of your service to him you have come close to Me. Vakresvara is
empowered by krsna-sakti. By serving my dear devotee Vakresvara Pandita you
have attained the mercy of Krsna."
Hearing these words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Devananda was
overwhelmed with the sentiments of bhakti. His voice was choked with divine
emotion, and he said, "O My Lord; O Supreme Master—You have appeared in
Nabadwipa just to deliver all the fallen souls. I am a sinner. I have commited great
sins against divinity. I have failed to worship your lotus feet. As a result of this, I
have cheated myself out of your causeless mercy. O Lord of all creation;
Supersoul of all that lives! You are supremely merciful. By your causeless mercy I
have been able to take darsan of your holy feet on this day. O Supremely merciful
one—please be kind upon me and instruct me in the goal of life. Please explain the
meaning of Srimad-Bhagavatam to me as well. Hearing this humble request of

[p.28]
Devananda Pandita, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu spoke as follows:
"Listen carefully, O brahmana. Always praise Srimad-Bhagavatam. Never
let any explanation of Srimad-Bhagavatam other than bhakti issue forth from your
lips. From beginning, middle to end, this is its meaning: constant devotion to
Krsna is eternally perfect flawless, and infallible. It is the highest goal of life. The
Supreme Lord appears in innumerable avataras beginning with Kurma. His
appearance and disappearance is transcendental. In the same way, SrimadBhagavatam is not a material creation: its appearance and disappearance is
completely divine. In a trance of bhakti-yoga Vyasa compiled the SrimadBhagavatam. It passed through him and appeared on his tongue as a result of the
mercy of Krsna. If one doesn't understand that the Srimad-Bhagavatam is divine
truth on the level of God Himself he will never realize its meaning. This is the
verdict of all authorized scriptures. One who understands the Srimad-Bhagavatam
in that way has real knowledge. If one approaches the Srimad-Bhagavatam with
material knowledge he will never understand it. If, however, one is unlearned but
takes shelter of the Srimad-Bhagavatam he will be enlightened with its meaning.
The Srimad-Bhagavatam is filled with divine love, prema. It is an extension of
Krsna Himself and it reveals his confidential pastimes of divine love.
"O brahmana! Previously you committed an offense to the lotus feet of
Srivasa Pandita. You must go to him and beg forgiveness at his lotus feet. There
is no difference between the book Bhagavata and the bhakta bhagavata. If you get
the mercy of the bhakta bhagavata then you will easily attain the mercy of the
book Bhagavata."

[p.29]
Having thus heard the words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Devananda
Pandita immediately went to Srivasa Thakura and begged forgiveness for his
offenses. At that time, Srivasa Thakura embraced Devananda and forgave his
offenses. The four directions were filled with the sound of the holy name of Hari
as the devotees were all jubilant upon Mahaprabhu's return to Nabadwipa-dhama.
From that day on, Devananda Pandita was accepted in the midst of the followers
of Mahaprabhu as a great devotee. Devananda Pandita's disappearance day falls on
the dark moon ekadasi of the month of Pausa, which corresponds to the month of
December.
Lives of the Saints
Dhananjaya Pandit
Caitanya-Bhagavata says that Dhananjaya Pandita had all the symptoms
of a great personality. At every moment he was dear to Nityananda Prabhu's
heart. In this way, Vrndavana dasa Thakura describes the glories of Dhananjaya
Pandita. Dhananjaya Pa.dita's birthplace was in Sitalagrama. This village is in the
Bardhaman district in Katwa and is situated near the Mangalakota police station
and the post office of Kaicara. Sri Bhaktivedanta Swami remarks, "On the narrow
railway from Burdwan to Katwa is a railway station about nine miles from Katwa
known as Kaicara. One has to go about a mile northeast of this station to reach
Sitala. The temple was a thatched house with walls made of mud. Some time ago,
the Zamindars of Bajaravana Kabasi, the Mulliks, constructed a big house for the
purpose of a temple, but for the last sixty-five years, the temple has been broken
down and abandoned. The foundation of the old temple is still visible. There is a

[p.30]
tulasi pillar near the temple, and every year during the month of January the
disappearance day of Dhananjaya Pandita is observed. It is said that for some time
Pandita Dhananjaya was in a sankirtana party under the direction of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, and then he went to Vrndavana. Before going to Vrndavana, he lived
for some time in a village named Sancadapancada, which is six miles south of the
Memari railway station. Somteimes this village is also known as the "place of
Dhananjaya" (Dhananjayera Pata). After some time, he left the responsibility for
worship with a disciple and went back to Vrndavana. After returning from
Vrndavana to Sitala-grama, he established a Deity of Gaurasundraa in the temple.
The descendants of Pandita Dhananjaya still look after the temple worship."
Some people differ with the orthodox opinion of Dhananjaya Pandita's
birthplace. According to their view, he took birth within the Cattagrama district in
the area known as Jadagrama. There, in a place which is also called Sitalagrama
and is known as Sancada Pancada Grama is a deity whose service was established
by him.
Dhananjaya Pandita was in Nabadwipa when Caitanya Mahaprabhu
performed his kirtana pastimes there. After he returned to Bengal from Vrndavana
he established a deity in a village called Jalandi Grama. The deities of that temple
are Sri Sri Gopinatha, Sri Sri Nitai-Gaura, and a salagrama-sila, Sri
Sri Damodara. Dhananjaya Pandita left no direct descendants. He had a brother
named Sri Sanjaya. His son's name was Sri Rama Kanai Thakura. His birthplace is
presently known as Muluka-grama and is near present-day Bolapura. Some people
say that Sanjaya Pandita was the disciple of Dhananjaya Pandita. At present the

[p.31]
service of the deities established in Sitalagrama by Dhananjaya Pandita are
worshiped by the descendants of Sri Dhananjaya Pandita's disciples. Sri
Dhananjaya Pandita had a disciple named Sri Jiva Krsna who established a deity
of Sri Syamasundara which is presently maintained there in the house of a devotee
named Sri Gopala Caudhari. Sri Dhananjaya Pandita's samadhi-mandira or
memorial resting place may be found in Sitala-grama. Dhananjaya Pandita passed
away and entered into the eternal pastimes of the Lord on the eighth day of the full
moon in the month of Karttika.

Lives of the Saints
Gadadhara Das Thakura

Sri Gadadhara dasa Thakura used to live in Nabadwipa dhama, but after
the disappearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, he moved to Katwa. Finally he
moved to a village called Endiyadaha-grama, where he made his ultimate
residence. Gadadhara dasa Thakura had a disciple in Katwa named Yadunandana
Cakravarti. Gadadhara dasa was one of the eternal associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu. The Gaura-ganodesa-dipika mentions
Gadadhara dasa as the extension of Srimati Radharani's beauty and luster. There it
is written: “The gopi named Candrakanti, who was a vibhuti (expansion) of Sri
Radha, appeared in Gaura-lila as Gadadhara dasa, a close associate of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.” Sri Gadadhara dasa was not one of the Gopalas who served
Nityananda Prabhu in the mood of sakhya-rasa, friendship. Rather he was always

[p.32]
merged in the mellow of madhurya-rasa.
Sripad Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja writes as follows of Gadadhara
dasa in his Caitanya-Caritamrta commentary: “About eight or ten miles from
Calcutta on the banks of the Ganges is a village known as Endiyadaha-grama.
Srila Gadadhara dasa was known as an inhabitant of this village...After the
disappearance of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu Gadadhara dasa came from
Nabadipa to Katwa. Thereafter he came to Endiyadaha-grama and resided there.
He is stated to be the luster of the body of Srimati RadharanY, just as Srila
Gadadhara Pandita is an incarnation of Srimati Radharani justa as Srila Gadadhara
Pandita is an incarnation of Srimati Radharani Herself. Caitanya Mahaprabhu is
sometimes explained to be radha-bhava-dyuti-suvalita, or characterized by the
emotions and bodily luster of Srimati Radharani. Gadadhara dasa is this dyuti or
luster. He counts among the associates of both Srila Gaurahari and Nityananda
Prabhu....Even though he was an associate of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, he was not
among the cowherd boys but was situated in the transcendental mellow of
conjugal love. He established a temple of Sri Gaurasundara in Katwa.
“In 1434 sakabda (1534 A.D.) when Lord Nityananda Prabhu was
empowered by Lord Caitanya to preach the sankirtana movement in Bengal, Sri
Gadadhara dasa was one of Lord Nityananda's chief assistans. He preached the
sankirtana movement by requesting everyone to chant the Hare Krsna mahamantra....When Srila Gadadhara dasa was preaching the cult of hari-kirtana, there
was a magistrate who was very much against his sankirtana movement. Following
in the footsteps of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Srila Gadhadhara dasa one night

[p.33]
went to the house of the Kazi and requested him to chant the Hare Krsna mantra.
The Kazi replied, “All right, I shall chant Hare Krsna tomorrow.” On hearing this,
Srila Gadadhara dasa Prabhu began to dance, and he said, “Why tomorrow? You
have already chanted the Hare Krsna mantra, so simply continue.”
“...Srila Gadadhara dasa is considered to be a united form of Candrakanti,
who is hte effulgence of Srimati Radharani, and Purnananda, who is an expansion
of Lord Balarama's dear girlfriend. Thus Srila Gadadhara dasa was one of the
associates of both Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda Prabhu. Once while Srila
Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was returning to Bengal from Jagannatha Puri with
Nityananda Prabhu, he forgot himself and began talking very loudly as if he were
a girl of Vrajabhumi selling yogurt, and Srila Nityananda Prabhu noted this.
Another time, while absorbed int he ecstasy of the gopis, he carried a jug filled
with Ganges water on his head as if he were selling milk. When Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu appeared in the house of Raghava Pandita while going to Vrndavana,
Gadadhara dasa went to see Him, and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was so glad that
He put His foot on his head. When Gadadhara dasa Prabhu was present in
Endiyadaha he established a Balagopala murti for worship there. Sri Madhava
Ghosh performed a drama known as Dana-khanda with the help of Sri Nityananda
Prabhu and Sri Gadadhara dasa.
“The tomb of Gadadhara dasa Prabhu, which is in the village of
Endiyadaha, was under the control of the Samyogi Vaisnavas and later under the
direction of Siddha Bhagavan dasa Babaji of Kalna. Byhis order, Sri Madhus¨dana
Mullik, one of hte members of the aristocratice Mullik family of the

[p.34]
Narikeladanga in Calcutta, established a patavadi (monastery) there in the Bengali
year 1256. He also arranged for the worship of a Deity named Sri Radhakanta. His
son, Balaicanda Mullik, established Gaura-Nitai Deities there in the Bengali year
1312. Thus on the throne of the temple are both Gaura-Nityananda Deities and
Radha-Krsna Deities.”
When Caitanya Mahaprabhu sent Nityananda Prabhu to Bengal to preach
the nectar of the holy name, he sent Sri Rama dasa and Sri Gadadhara dasa with
him. Once when he was carrying a waterpot on his head, Gadadhara dasa, in the
mood of a gopi called out “Who will buy milk? Who will buy yogurt?” Saying
this, he laughed at the joke.
The details of how Gadadhara dasa delivered the Kazi are as follows: One
day, Gadadhara dasa went to the house of the Kazi, overwhelmed with krsnaprema, madly dancing and performing hari-sankirtana. When he arrived at the
Kazi's door, he began loudly calling for the Kazi. The Kazi, enraged, went outside
his house ready to chastise Gadadhara dasa for disturbing the peace. But when he
beheld the beautiful form of Gadadhara dasa, who was the personification of Sri
Radhika's divine luster, he was stunned. When Gadadhara dasa embraced the Kazi
with great affection the Kazi said, “Thakura! Why have you come?”
Gadadhara dasa said, “I want to have a talk with you.
“What do you wish to talk about?”
“Gaura-Nityananda have appeared upon this earth to deliver humankind
with divine love by distributing the sweet nectar of the holy name of Hari. Why
don't you chant this sweet name of Hari?”

[p.35]
“Tomorrow I shall chant the name Hari.”
“Why chant the holy name tomorrow? I have come to deliver you with the
holy name of Krsna. Now you have begun your life of auspiciousness by vibrating
the holy name of Hari. From today on all your sins and miseries will disappear by
the grace of the holy name if you simply continue this chanting—this is why I
have come: to deliver you.”
Hearing the words of Gadadhara dasa, the Kazi was bewildered. At length,
he smiled and again said, “Tomorrow I will chant the holy name of Hari.” Upon
hearing the holy name of Hari issuing from the mouth of the Muslim Kazi,
Gadadhara dasa at once became mad in the ecstasy of Krsna prema. At last he
said, “Why tomorrow! Just now you have said the name ‘Hari.’ All your sins will
now melt away and you will become supremely purified by the power of the holy
name.”
Purified by the grace of Gadadhara dasa and the holy name of Krsna, the
Kazi took shelter of the holy feet of Gadadhara dasa.
In this way, Gadadhara dasa delivered countless sinners, nonbelievers, and
yavanas with the holy name of Krsna. He disappeared on the eight day of the full
moon in the month of Kartika. All glories to Sri Gadadhara dasa Thakura Prabhu.
Lives of the Saints
Gadadhara Pandit

From the time that he was a boy, Gadadhara Pandita was always in the
association of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Sri Gadadhara Pandita's father's name

[p.36]
was Sri Madhava Misra; his mother's name was Sri Ratnavati Devi . They lived
close to the house of Jagannatha Misra in Mayapura. Sri Ratnavati Devi looked
upon Sacidevi as if Sacidevi were her big sister. The two of them were always
spending time with each other. At the of his childhood pastimes, Gaurahari used to
often play with Gadadhara Pandita. They both went to the village school together
to study. Gadadhara Pandita was a year younger than Gaurahari. Gadadhara had so
much affection for Gaurahari that he could not leave his company even for a
moment.
In the Gaura-ganodesa-dipika it has been explained by Kavi Karnapura that
in Vraja-lila Sri Gadadhara Pandita was the daughter of Vrsabhanu—Srimati
Radharani. This is confirmed in the notebooks of Svarupa Damodara as well as in
the songs of Sri Vasudeva Ghosa Thakura. According to Sri Caitanya Caritamrta:
“No one can describe the characteristics and ecstatic love of Gadadhara Pandita.
Therefore another name for Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu is Gadadhara Prananatha,
“the life and soul of Gadadhara Pandita.” No one can say how merciful the Lord is
to Gadadhara Pandita, but people know the Lord as Gadaira Gaura, “the Lord
Gauranga of Gadadhara Pandita.”
The Caitanya bhagavata records that when Isvara Puri stayed in
Nabadwipa Mayapura, he lived at the house of Sri Gopinatha acarya for a few
months. At that time, ^svara Puri was very affectionate towards Gadadhara and
tutured him from his book Krsna-lilamrta. From his early childhood, Gadadhara
Pandita was very serious and self-composed. He was peaceful, renounced, and
fond of solitude. On the other hand, in His childhood, Gaurasundara appeared to

[p.37]
be very fickle, unsteady, and whimsical. When they were studying in school, he
would distrub Gadadhara with whimsical questions whose sophistry was meant to
baffle Gadadhara. Gadadhara didn't like this as it disturbed his mind and his
studies. As a result he was forced to keep Gaurahari at a distance. But he couldn't
bear to keep aloof from the Lord. This posed a great dilemma for Gadadhara
Pandita. The Lord said, “Gadadhara! Soon I shall become such a great Vaisnava
that even Brahma and Siva will come to me and bow down.
Sri Gadadhara Pandita was especially affectionate towards Mukunda Datta.
Whenever sadhus or sannyasis would come to Nabadwipa from somewhere,
Mukunda Datta would tell Gadadhara and together they would go and visit that
holy man. One time, from Chattagrama, Pundarika Vidyanidhi came to
Nabadwipa. At that time, Mukunda Datta intimated to Gadadhara that there was a
Vaisnava worth seeing, and suggested they they go visit him. With great jubilation
at the prospect of seeing a Vaisnava, Gadadhara Pandita went to visit Pundarika
Vidyanidhi with Mukunda Datta. When Gadadhara Pandita came before
Pundarika, he saw that he appeared to be a great materialist. His faith was
somewhat damaged upon seeing this. He said to himself, “If he is a Vaisnava, why
does he appear to be such a materialist?”
Mukunda Datta, knowing the mind of Gadadhara, sweetly sang a verse
about Krsna-lila. Mukunda Datta had known Pundarika Vidyanidhi, and by
sweetly chanting this verse he awakened his inner consciousness. Hearing
Mukunda Datta singing this verse about krsna-lila from Srimad-Bhagavatam he
began crying “Krsna! Krsna!” and weeping again and again. The Caitanya-

[p.38]
Bhagavata says that the flowing of tears from his eyes was as if the Ganges had
descended. Finally he fell upon the ground, and after rolling back and forth for
some time lost consciousness.
Upon seeing this, Gadadhara Pandita felt great remorse within his mind.
He began to reconsider his attitude toward Pundarika Vidyanidhi. He thought, “I
thought that this great devotee, this mahabhagavata, was an ordinary sense
enjoyer. I have committed a great offense. If, however, I accept mantra initiation
from him I may become free from this offense. I see no other way.” In this way,
Sri Gadadhara Pandita made up his mind to take initiation from Pundarika
Vidyanidhi.
When Pundarika returned to his external consciousness, Mukunda Datta
introduced Gadadhara Pandita to him. Hearing from Mukunda Datta about the
character of Gadadhara Pandita, Pundarika was delighted. When he heard of
Gadadhara's desire to become his disciple he was pleased. He smiled, saying, “I
consider myself very fortunate. Only after many many births does one get a
disciple like this.” Soon after this, one an auspicious day, Sri Gadadhara Pandita
accepted mantra initiation from Pundarika Vidyanidhi.
After Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned from Gaya-dhama, he began his
manifestations of Krsna-prema. At Gaya, he had performed his pastime of taking
shelter of ^svara Puri. Once he returned home, he began a new life. Day and night
he would float in the ocean of Krsna-prema. Seeing Mahaprabhu's wonderful
tears of ecstasy in Krsna-prema, Gadadhara found himself also overwhelmed with
ecstasy. He too cried tears of joy in divine love of Krsna. From then on

[p.39]
Gadadhara Pandita found it difficult to give up the Lord's association even for an
hour. One day, Gadadhara brought Mahaprabhu some tambula. When he arrived
at the house of the Lord, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was deeply absorbed in a mood
of separation from Krsna. Mahaprabhu said, “Gadadhara! Where is
Syamasundara? Where is that Lord of Vrndavana who is dressed in yellow
cloth?” Saying this, the Lord began to weep. Gadadhara was stunned and could
not understand what answer to give. With great reverence, he humbly submitted,
“Krsna is in your heart.”
Upon hearing this Mahaprabhu began tearing at his chest, but Gadadhara
quickly restrained His hands from doing any damage. The Lord said, “Gadadhara!
Let go of my hands! If I cannot see Krsna I will not be able to maintain my life.”
Gadadhara said, “If you just remain patient, Krsna will surely reveal Himself. He
will surely come here before long.” With this Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was
pacified. Seeing these pastimes of Gaura-Gadadhara from a little distance,
Sacimata thought to herself with great satisfaction, “This boy Gadadhara is very
intelligent. I need not fear for Gaurahari's sake.” Sacimata said, “Gadadhara! You
must always stay by the side of my son Gaurahari; in this way I shall not have to
worry.
One day in the house of Suklambhara Brahmacari the Lord was to speak
something about Krsna. Hearing this, Gadadhara went to the house of
Suklambhara Brahmacari and took his seat within the house. Outside on the
veranda the Lord began to speak. As the Lord spoke he became overwhelmed with
ecstasy and went into a rasik trance. All the devotees surrounding him also began

[p.40]
to swim in the waves of prema. In this way for some time everyone tasted premarasa. Gadadhara's prema could not have been more intense. Lowering his head he
began loudly weeping again and again with tears of ecstasy. Hearing Gadadhara's
pitiful tears, Mahaprabhu said, “Who is that within the house who is weeping so
intensely?“ Suklambhara Brahmacari said, “It is your Gadadhara.” The Lord said,
“Gadadhara! You are most fortunate. From your early childhood you have been a
determined devotee of Krsna. My own birth was useless. Because of all my sinful
karma I could not attain Krsna.” Saying this the Lord embraced Gadadhara in
great ecstatic love.
When the Lord was performing his Nabadwipa-lila his chief assistant was
Gadadhara. They who in Vrndavana are Radha-Krsna take the form of GauraGadadhara in these pastimes in Nabadwipa on the banks of the Ganges. And those
who in Vrndavana are gopas and gopis take part in the pastimes of the Lord in
Nabadwipa by performing kirtana. One day the Lord was wandering by the banks
of the Ganges when he came upon a small forest grove and sat down. Gradually he
became absorbed in remembering the Vrndavana pastimes. Mukunda Datta began
sweetly singing songs in the purva-raga. Gadadhara, after gathering flowers in the
forest decorated the Lord's neck with a garland. Just as formerly in Vrndavana, Sri
Radha used to decorate Lord Krsna, inthe same way Gadadhara decorated the holy
form of Lord Gauranga. Someone sang a sweet song, someone performed a
beautiful dance. At length Gauranga sat Gadadhara down on the root of a tree
which served as a raised platform. Sri Advaita acarya performed the aroti to the
two of them. Sri Nityananda Prabhu was seated on the left of them. Srivasa

[p.41]
Pandita Prabhu was taking flowers and decorating them. Narahari was waving the
camara. Suklambhara was offering candana. Murari Gupta was singing glories to
the Lord. Madhava, Vasudeva, Pursottama, Vijaya, and Mukunda, as well as
others sang different songs in various ragas.
In this way, the Lord finished his Nadiya-lila; he performed his sannyasalila and left his mother and his country and went to live in Jagannatha Puri. At that
time Gadadhara Pandita followed Him and also went to Jagnnatha Puri, to live.
There Gadadhara Pandita engaged himself in the service of the Sri Gopinatha
deity. At that time the Lord would regularly go and visit his dear Gadadhara to
float in the waves of rasa by discussing Krsna. When the Lord made his
pilgrimage to Vrndavana, he forbade Gadadhara Pandita to go with Him. At that
time, his separation knew no bounds.
Gadadhara Pandita use to teach a Srimad-Bhagavatam class. His eternal
companion, Sri Gaurasundara used to sit and hear from him. Sri Gadadhara
Pandita's discussion of Srimad-Bhagavatam was like an ocean of nectar. After the
forty-eight years of the Lord's manifest pastimes were over, He disappeared into
the Gopinatha deity of Gadadhara Pandita. This is recorded in Bhakti-ratnakara.
Bhaktivinoda Thakura has written:
smara gaura gadadhara kelikalam
bhava gaura gadadhara paksacaram
srnu gaura gadadhara carukatham
bhaja godruma-kanana kunjavidhum
Remember the wonderful pastimes of Gaura and Gadadhara. Become a

[p.42]
servant of Gaura and Gadadhara. Listen to the beautiful narrations concerning
Gaura and Gadadhara, and worship Lord Gaura, the beautiful moon of the groves
of Godrum.
Sri Gadadhara Pandita Goswami's appearance day is on the dark moon day
of the month of Vaisakha.

Shri Gangamata Goswamini

Within the present state of Bengal, lies what was once the kingdom of Sri Naresh
Narayana. King Naresh Narayana had a daughter named Sachi. From early
childhood, Sachi was a topmost devotee of the Lord. Within a short time, Sachi
began her education. At first she absorbed herself in grammar and poetry, but
having become expert in these, she gradually became completely immersed in
endlessly studying the scriptures. Even as a young girl, she was always fascinated
with Krishna consciousness. As Sachi came of age, all the young boys were
charmed by her beauty. But within Sachi's mind there was not the least attraction
for any of the young men, no matter how handsome or rich they were. Her mind
was always filled with thoughts of Madana Gopala.

Sri Naresh Narayana began to think of arranging for his daughter's marriage.
Upon understanding her father's intentions, Sachi told him, "I will not marry a

[p.43]
mortal man, born of this world of death." The king and queen wanted to make
arrangements to give her hand in marriage. But Sachi did not want to be wed.
Always regretting their failure to arrange for their daughter's wedding, in due
course of time, the king and queen grew old and passed away.

After the passing of the king and queen, the royal succession fell to Sachi. Sachi
accepted the responsibilies of governing the kingdom. One day, on the plea of
seeing more of the kingdom Sachi left to visit the holy places of pilgrimage, after
appointing some relatives to govern in her place. Although she wandered here and
there, nowhere could her heart find satisfaction. She decided to seek out a
bonafide spiritual master. After much travel, she arrived in Jagannatha Puri. One
day, after taking darshan of the Jagannatha deities, she received an inner message
and was inspiredto go Vrindavana.

With this Sachi felt that the moon of her good fortune had arisen. In Vrindavana,
she chanced to meet Haridas Pandit, whose single-minded devotion to Gauranga
and Nitayananda was unsurpassed. Upon seeing the spiritual power and austerity
of his divine form, Sachi became filled with ecstasy. After meditating deeply for
several days, Haridas Pandit gave Sachi shelter. Sri Sachi fell at the lotus feet of
Haridas Pandit with her eyes pouring tears and prayed for his mercy.

The Chaitanya Charitamrita gives Haridas Pandit's preceptorial ancestry as
follows, "Ananta Acarya was a disciple of Gadadhara Pandit. His body was

[p.44]
always overwhelmed by the ecstasy of Krishna-prema. He was magnanimous and
advanced in all respects. Ananta Acarya was a reservoir of all good qualities. No
one can estimate how great he was. Pandit Haridas was his beloved disciple."

In order to examine Sachi's qualifications as a disciple, Haridas Pandit said: "It is
not possible for the daughter of a king to go to Vrindavana and live as a poor
devotee, constantly absorbed in bhajan with little to eat and no comforts. It will be
better for you to stay at home and worship than to go to Vrindavana. "

Sri Sachidevi could understand what all this talk was for. She paid no attention to
all these words of discouragement. With fierce determination, renunciation, and
austerity, she went on with her bhajan, and her service to her guru. As she
absorbed herself in her austere service, step by step she renounced her opulent
dresses and fine ornaments.

One day, Haridas Pandit Goswami said to Sacidevi, "If you like, giving up all
pride and fear, you may wander throughout Vrajaand practice begging from place
to place as a renounced devotee. You have my blessings. " Upon hearing the
words of her gurudeva, Sachi's joy knew no bounds. Thereafter, freed from all
false ego, her body covered only with rags, she went house to house in
Vrindavana, begging alms in the fashion of a bumblebee who takes only a little
pollen from each flower. In this way she showed the intense renunciation and
austerity of a highly advanced devotee. All the devotees in Vrindavan were

[p.45]
astonished by her severe renunciation.

Gradually, Saci's body became frail and weak. She grew thin, and was covered
with soot. Still, she took no notice of her condition, and continued following her
austere regimen. Physically exhausted from her diligent service she would sleep
on the banks of the Yamuna, and then rise again the next day to cleanse the Lord's
temple. She would regularly circumambulate some holy places, see the aroti of
the Deity, and listen to the lectures on Srimad-Bhagavatam.

Seeing the intense renunciation of Sachidevi, Haridas Pandit Goswmi's heart was
filled with pity. His mercy towards her increased. Smiling, he called Sachidevi
and said to her, "You are a princess, and yet you have made such an intense effort
to worship Krishna that seeing your renunciation and austerity in the cause of
devotion I have become supremely happy. Soon I shall give you initiation into
the mantra."

Haridas Pandit had one disciple named Sri Laksmipriya, toward whom he was
very affectionate. Just at that time she arrived in Vrindavana. Sri Laksmipriya
used to chant three hundred thousand names of Krishna daily. When she arrived,
Haridas Pandit sent her to live near where Sachidevi performed her daily bhajan
on the banks of the Radhakunda. Taking the order of her guru on her head,
Laksmipriya went to the Radha-kunda to be with Sachidevi and help her with her
bhajan. Every day Sachidevi and Lakshmipriya would circumambulate

[p.46]
Govardhan hill. In this way, in the company of Lakshmipriyadevi, Sachi
continued her worship of Krishna with great determination, living on the banks of
the Radhakunda, until one day Haridas Pandit called for her to return.

He

instructed her to quickly return to Jagannatha Puri, to continue with her bhajan and
to preach what she had learned of Sri Caitanya's teachings. At that time almost all
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's personal associates had gone back to Godhead, and had
entered into their eternal, unmanifest pastimes.

Sri Sachidevi left Vrindavana and returned to Jagannatha Puri. On the order of her
gurudev, she went to the house where Sarvabhauma Pandit had once stayed.
There she engaged in bhajan and began giving classes on the SrimadBhagavatam. The old house of Sarvabhauma was dilapidated and crumbling. For
a long time no one had lived there. No one remained there to worship the
Damodara Salagram that had once been worshiped by Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya
himself. Sacidevi established first-class worship of the shalagrama according to
the traditional rules and regulations of the shastra. In order to hear her wonderful
siddhantic interpretations of the Srimad-Bhagavatam, faithful devotees would
come to Sarvabhauma's house day after day. In a short time her Bhagavatam
classes became very famous, and people would come from miles around just to
hear her.

One day, the king of Jagannatha Puri, Mukunda Dev, came to hear the
Bhagavatam from Sachidevi. Hearing her original explanations of siddhanta, the

[p.47]
king was completely astounded. He thought to himself that he would like to make
a nice offering to Sachidevi, out of appreciation for her devotion to Krishna. That
night he had a wonderful dream. Lord Jagannatha came to him in his dream and
ordered him, "Offer Sachidevi a place on the banks of the Ganges." the following
day king Mukunda deva went to Sachidevi. With great humility, Sachidevi
offered the king a sitting place and asked him the reason for his visit. King
Mukunda dev explained about the vision he received from Jagannatha and how the
Lord had instructed him to construct a place by the Ganges for Sachidevi. Sri
Sachidevi was not disposed to accept any sort of wealth or comfortable situation
and wanted to refuse. But the king kept pressing his wishes again and again. At
that time, not wanting to violate Lord Jagannatha's order, King Mukunda Deva
issued a decree naming a holy ghat by the side of of the White Ganges after Sri
Sachidevi.

The decree let it be known that Sri Sachidevi was a princess who had left
everything to come to Jagannatha Puri and preach the holy gospel of Sri Caitanya.

One day the day of Mahavaruni-snana approached and Sri Sachidevi wanted to go
to the Ganges to bathe. But Sachidevi's gurudeva had forbidden her ever to leave
Jagannatha Puri. Remembering the order of her gurudeva, Sachidevi gave up her
desire to bathe in the Ganges. That night, Jagannatha came to her in a dream and
said, "Sachi, don't think like that—the day when Varuni will take bath that day
you you must go and bathe in the White Ganges. Gangadevi has been praying for

[p.48]
your association. So you must go to the White Ganges."

Having had such a divine vision from Jagannatha, Sachidevi was very joyful. The
day of Varuni-snana came. In the middle of the night, Sachidevi went to the
White Ganges to bathe. As seh bathed at Sveta Ganga, the current of Gangadevi
picked her up and began moving along. The waters of the Ganges overflooded the
pond, and the current ran before her in a flood until she arrived at the Jagannatha
Mandira. Seeing this, thousands and thousands of the dhambhasis in Jagannatha
Puri became ecstatic and took their bath in the ganges. The four directions were
filled with prayers that were shouted in great ecstasy, and there was a huge
commotion. In the midst of great jubilation everyone bathed in the Ganges.

In the midst of the comotion the guards at the gate of the Jagannatha temple
awoke. They were speechless at seeing the commotion going on in all directions.
Hearing a great noise they went inside the temple. They began talking loudly
amongst themselves. Hearing all the noise, the king had also awakened. Anxious
to see that everything was all right, the king ordered the gates to the temple
opened. At this, the gates were opened. By some miracle, Sachidevi was standing
there, alone, inside the temple of Jagannatha. The servants and pujaris of
Jagannatha concluded that she must be a thief who has come to steal the valuable
ornaments of Jagannatha. Many people said, "This cannot be! There must be
some mystery here." Immediately Sachidevi was imprisoned in the dungeons to
stand trial for theft. Sachidevi's mind, however, did not become weak or

[p.49]
confused. While imprisoned, she absorbed herself in constantly chanting the holy
name of Krishna.

Late that night, King Mukunda dev saw Lord Jagannatha in a dream. Jagannatha
angrily told him: "Immediately release Sachidevi from your dungeons. It was
because I wanted to personally arrange for washing her holy feet that I had the
Ganges bring her to my temple. If you want your life to be auspicious, then you
had better make the pandas and pujaris bow at her feet and pray for forgiveness.
You yourself must take initiation from her.

Seeing this in his dream, the king was repentant, and right after taking his bath, he
had the pandas and pujaris go to the place where Sachidevi was being held and
immediately release her, falling at her feet and begging for forgiveness. They
went there and payed full obeisances, falling down like rods before her feet. The
king himself went before Sachidevi, and with great entreaties begged her to
forgive him for his offenses at the holy feet of a devotee. At that time, he told
Sachidevi of how Lord Jagannatha had ordered him to accept her as his guru and
take mantra initiation from her.

Understanding all these things to be the pastimes of Lord Jagannatha, Sachidevi
became extremely joyful. Her heart filled with divine love for Krishna. Placing
her hand on the king's head, she gave him her blessings. Soon after this, on the
order of Jagannatha, on an auspicious day, Sri Sachidevi initiated King Mukunda

[p.50]
Deva into the eighteen syllable Radha-Krishna mantra. Along with the king,
many pujaris also took shelter of her on that day. From that day forward, Sri
Sachidevi was known as Gangamata Goswamini.

One day a smarta-brahmana named Mahidhara Sharma had come to the banks of
the Sveta-Ganga to worship his ancestors. Having heard of the glories of
Gangamata Goswamini, he was eager to have darshan of her holy feet. After
showing great respect to the pandit, Sri Gangamata Goswamini offered him a
place to sit. She asked him what his purpose in coming was. The brahmana
pandit explained the righteous reason for his coming. Seeing his genuine
earnestness and piety, Sri Gangamata Goswamini explained the siddhanta of
Srimad-Bhagavatam to the brahmana. The brahmana pandit was astonished by her
explanations of Srimad-Bhagavatam, and dived and surfaced in the nectar of her
ambrosial words. After this, the pandit brahmana asked to take shelter at the lotus
feet of Gangamata Goswamini. On an auspicious day she initiated him into the
Radha-Krishna mantra of ten syllables. Mahidhara Sharma's birthplace is in
Dhananjaya-pura. On the order of Gangamata Goswamini, he preached the
message of nam-prema, and the teachings of Gaura-Nityananda throughout
Bengal.

Lives of the Saints

[p.51]
Gaurakishore Das Babaji

niskincanasya bhagavan-bhajanon-mukhasya
param param jigamisor-bhava-sagarasya
sandarsanam visayinam-atha yostams ca
ha hanta hanta vis-bhaksanato'py asadhu
“For one who really wants to cross the material ocean and who wants to
engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord without any connection
with anything material, seeing a materialist engaged in sense gratification and
seeing a woman who is similarly interested is more abominable than drinking
poison willingly.” (Caitanya-candrodaya-Nataka 8.23) The letter and spirit of this
verse was the very life and soul of Gaura Kisora dasa Babaji Maharaja. He never
accepted anything from materialists. He used to find cloth discarded from the
bodies of the dead at the burning ghat. After washing it in the Ganges he would
tear it into pieces to make some outer cloth and kaupins. He would beg some
handfuls of parched rice from the houses of pious and saintly grhasthas, and then
he would go and soak that rice in the Ganges until it was soft. After adding some
salt and pepper he would take that as his sustenance. He would not beg for
anything more than this. He was completely without material desires.
Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Goswami Prabhupada, the founder/acarya
of Sri Caitanya Matha and Sri Gaudiya Math as well as their various branches
took bhagavata-diksa from this siddha-mahatma, this great-souled perfected
spiritual master. Of course, Gaurakisora dasa Babaji Maharaja is a mahapurusa, a

[p.52]
great personality, a niskincana devotee free from all material things; still, in
connection with the shelter he accepted previous to manifesting his greatness as a
devotee, it has been learned that he took birth in a Vaisya family by the banks of
the river Padma near Tepakhola in a place called Bagayan.
When Babaji Maharaja was living in the grhastha-asrama,his name was
Vamsi dasa. At that time he was maintaining his life by farming corn, in this way
doing honest work and living a regulated life according to the principles of the
scriptures along with his chaste and humble wife. In this way he lived for some
time. Gradually he began searching for the ultimate meaning of life. Finally, the
time for renunciation came. Breaking off his connection with his wife once and for
all, he left family life behind and went to Vrndavana. There he came in connection
with Bhagavata dasa Babaji Maharaja, one the disciples of that topmost Vaisnava,
Jagannatha dasa Babaji. From Bhagavata dasa Babaji Maharaja he accepted the
dress of one in the renounced order of life and thus became a Babaji after first
having wandered the sixty-four miles of Vrndavana, visiting all the holy places
there. At this time he maintained his life by practicing madhukari and sleeping
under a different tree each night. He saw all the residents of Vrndavana as being
the direct personal associates of Sri Krsna and offered his obeisances to every tree,
creeper, insect, and locust in the holy dhama.
For many days he stayed in Barshan. There, among other kinds of service
that he rendered, he would constantly make flower garlands for Radha and Krsna.
In this way he enjoyed great transcendental happiness. Srila Babaji Maharaja
stayed in Vrndavana for nearly thirty years, experiencing great inner satisfaction

[p.53]
by render all kinds of service to the Master and Mistress of Vrndavana, Sri Radha
and Krsna. After this time, by the mercy of the divine couple, he was ordered to go
to Nabadwipa-dhama in Gauda-mandala. Seeing Nabadwipa-dhama as
nondifferent from Vrndavana, Babaji Maharaja made his way to Gauda-mandala,
the holy place of Sri Gaurasundara's sweet pastimes. There, he visited all the holy
places connected with Lord Gauranga.
At this time, Babaji Maharaja constantly found himself overwhelmed by
different divine moods of ecstasy. Sometimes in one of these moods he would go
to the banks of the Ganges crying “Gaura! Gaura!” and dancing, then fainting in
ecstasy. On the banks of the Ganges there was a a small forest grove. There he
would wander, lost in ecstatic remembrance of the divine pastimes of Radha and
Govinda. Sometimes he would wander in the jungle oblivious to his own bodily
existence, dressed only in his kaupina, and sometimes he would simply wander
about naked. From time to time he would quietly chant the holy name with the
help of his mala, his rosary of tulasi beads. And from time to time he would chant
japa using a knotted cloth as beads to count the names on. From time to time he
would go to Svananda-Sukhada-Kunja in Godruma. There he would stay on the
porch of Bhaktivinoda's place and hear from his lips the sacred message of SrimadBhagavatam. For his own part, Bhaktivinoda himself was very eager to render
such a service to Babaji Maharaja, who would accept nothing material, and whose
service was difficult to get.
How difficult it was to get the service of Babaji Maharaja is illustrated by
the following example. Once the Maharaja of Kasi Bazaar, Manindra Chandra

[p.54]
Nandi Bahadur, sent someone to fetch Babaji Maharaja to his royal palace. At that
time Babaji Maharaja said, If I were to go to the king's palace, the desire for riches
would arise within me. So, in the king's company mutual ill-feelings would
develop between me and the king. If the king wants to be my friend, tell the king
to leave behind all his material opulence and the objects of the enjoyment and
come here where I am. He can live here with me, and live just as I am doing. He
can make a small covering out of a straw, like those used for covering the boats
used by the fisherman. There the two of us can live—the king and I—and together
we can worship Hari in great ecstasy.
Babaji Maharaja use to say that one who wanders here and there to gratify
the tongue, eating anything and everything in pursuit of enjoyment (bhojana) will
find that his worship, his bhajana is in vain. In other words: one who wants
bhojan will spoil his bhajan. Once a devotee named Haren Babu in his bhajankutir in Nabadwipa-dhama accepted some festival prasada in his bhajan-kutira.
For this reason, Srila Babaji would not speak to him for three days. On the fourth
day he said, “In your bhajan-kutira you have accepted “festival prasada” given by
low-class harlots and beautiful women. Because you have eaten things without
regard for where they have come from, your bhajan is useless.
Once on the anniversary of the disapperance of Srila Sanatana Goswami,
Srila Babaji Maharaja said, “This afternoon we shall have a great festival, a
mahotsava, for this holy day marks the passing of Srila Sanatana Goswami.” His
servant, who was nearby at the time, heard him and asked, “Where will you get the
things we need for a festival?” Srila Babaji Maharaja explained, “We have no

[p.55]
need of anything. We may fast and chant the holy name of Krsna, and in this
humble way we shall enjoy a great festival.”
One day, a resident of agaratala named Sri Nirendra Kumara Sena came to
visit Srila Babaji Maharaja. He wanted to know the siddha-pranali, the path of
perfection. Srila Babaji Maharaja told him, “You cannot know Bhagavan through
your fanciful imagination. If you go on chanting the holy name, you will
gradually realize the internal meaning of its syllables—the svarupa of the holy
name will manifest itself. The sadhaka at that time will also realize his own
internal self. At that time also, the sadhaka will awaken to his particular divine
service to Sri Krsna, the service that will be dear to his heart upon attaining
perfection.”
Once a certain Doctor told Srila Babaji Maharaja that he wanted to come
and live in Nabadwipa Dhama so that he could heal people for free. At that time,
Srila Babaji Maharaja told him, “If you really want to live in Nabadwipa, thengive
up your desire to set up a free clinic; give up your plans to help the sense enjoyers
by healing them. If you want to render some substantial service, then give up
everything except what promotes haribhajan. All other kinds of service and duties
simply bind one to a ghastly karmic reaction
.
Gauri Dasa Pandita

In Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita, Krishna dasa Kaviraja Goswami has
written:

[p.56]
tasya shri krishna chaitanya
sat premamara shakhinah
urdvhva-skandhavadhutendoh
shakharupan ganan numah
"Shri Nityananda Prabhu is the topmost branch of the indestructible tree of eternal
love of Godhead, Shri Krishna Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. I offer my respectful
obeisances to all the sub-branches of that topmost branch." Gauridasa Pandit is
one of the most important sub-branches of the Nityananda branch of the Chaitanya
tree of bhakti. Of this particular sub-branch of Nityananda, Shri Krishna Dasa
Kaviraja Goswami has written: gauridasa pandit yara premoddanda-bhakti,
krishna-prema dite, nite, dhare mahashakti. nityananda samarpila jati kula-panti,
shri chaitanya-nityananda kari pranapati. "Gauridasa Pandita, the emblem of the
most elevated devotional service in love of Godhead, had the greatest potency to
receive and deliver such love. Making Lord Chaitanya and Lord Nityananda the
Lords of his life, Gauridas Pandit sacrificed everything for the service of Lord
Nityananda, even the fellowship of his family."
Shri Gauridasa Pandit's father's name was Shri Kamsari Mishra. His
mother's name was Shri Kamala Devi. He had five brothers: Damodara,
Jagannatha, Suryadasa, Krishnadasa, and Nrishinga-Chaitanya. Previously, in
Vrindvana, Gauridasa Pandit was Subala Shakha, one of the twelve most
important cowherd-boy friends of Krishna who were known as the dvadashagopals.
In the Bardhaman district lies the town of Ambika-kalna, not far from the

[p.57]
city of Shantipura. In Ambika-kalna lived Gauridasa Pandit. At present, in the
house of Shri Gauridasa Pandit there is a temple where the deities of GauraNityananda are installed. In that temple there is an ancient manuscript, which is
said to be a copy of the Bhagavad-gita written in Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's
own hand, although this is not accepted by some authorities. Hearsay has it that
Shriman Mahaprabhu crossed the Ganges in a boat with an oar. Giving the oar to
Gauridasa Pandita, Mahaprabhu is supposed to have said, "With this oar, you may
help the fallen souls cross over the ocean of material existence." That oar is still
found at the temple of Gauridasa Pandit.
Gauridasa Pandit had an elder brother named Suryadas Sarakhela.
Suryadasa Sarakhela lived a few miles from Navadwipa in a place called
Shaligram. At that time he accepted employment as a secretary in the
Mohammedan government. He had two daughters: Shri Vasudha and Jahnava
Devi. These two daughters later married Shri Nityananda Prabhu. Of Gauridasa
Pandit's brothers, Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami has written: "Suryadasa
Sarakhela and his younger brother Krishnadasa Sarakhela both possessed firm
faith in Nityananda Prabhu. They were a reservoir of love of Godhead. "
Regarding Gauridasa Pandita, Bhaktivedanta Swami translates the
comments of Srila Bhaktivinoda Thakura i as follows: "It is said that Gauridasa
Pandit was always patronized by King Krishnadasa, the son of Harihoda.
Gauridasa Pandit lived in the village of Shaligrama, which is situated a few miles
from the railway station Muragaccha, and later he came to reside in Ambikakalana. It is stated in Gaura-ganodesha-dipika, verse 128, that formerly he was

[p.58]
Subal, one of the cowherd boy friends of Krishna and Balarama in Vrindavana.
Gauridas Pandit was the younger brotehr of Suryadasa Sarakhela, and with the
permission of his elder brother he shifted his residence tot he bank of the Ganges,
living there in the town known as Ambika-Kalna....The eldest son of Gauridasa
Pandita was known as big Balrama, and the youngest was known as Raghunatha.
The sons of Raghunatha were Mahesha Pandita and Govinda. Gauridasa Pandit's
daughter was known as Annapurna." According to Bhaktivinoda Thakura, some
of the descendants of Gauri Dasa Pandit are living today in the village of
Shaligram.
Bhaktivedanta Swami gives the location of Ambika-kalna as follows: "The
village Ambika-kalna, which is situated just across the River Ganges from
Shantipura, is two miles east of the Kalakanorta railway station on the Eastern
Railway." It may be noted that Ambika-Kalna may be visited by catching to train
to Nabadwip--dham at Howrah station in Calcutta and getting off at AmbikaKalna. Bhaktivedanta Swami writes: "In Ambika-Kalna there is a temple
constructed by the Zamindar of Burdwan. In front of the temple there is a big
tamarind tree, and it is said that Gauridasa Pandita and Lord Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu met under this tree. The place where the tempole is situated is known
as Ambika, and because it is in the area of Kalna, the village is known as Ambikakalna. It is said that a copy of Bhagavad-gita written by Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu still exists in this temple."
When Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, after performing different kinds of
pastimes in Navadwipa, wanted to take sannyasa, at that time he went to bid

[p.59]
goodbye to Gauridasa Pandita. At that time, Gauridasa Pandita felt great
separation from Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
This is described in a song by a devotee named Krishna dasa:
thakura panditera bari, gora nache phiri phiri,
nityananda bole hari hari
kandi gaurdasa bole pori prabhur padatole
kabhu na charibe mora bari
amara vachana rakha ambika nagare thako
ei nivedana tuwa pai
yadi chari yabe tumi nischoya maribo ami
rahibo se nirakhiya kai
tomara ye duti bhai, thako mora ei thai
tabe sabara hoy paritran
punah nivedana kori na chariho gaurahari
tabe jani patita pavan
prabhu kahe gauridasa charaho emata asha
pratimurti seva kari dekha
tahate achaye ami, nischaya janiho tumi
satya mora ei vakya rakha
eta shuni gauridasa chari dirgha nihshvasa
phukari phukari punah kande
punah sei dui bhai prabhodha karoye tai
tabu hiya khira nahi vandhe

[p.60]
kahe dina krishnadasa, chaitanya carane asha
dui bhai rahilo tathaya
thakura panditer preme, vandi hoila dui jane
bhakata vatsala teni gaya
akula dekhiya tare, kahe gaura dhire dhire
amara thakilam tora thai
nischaya jani-i tumi, tomara ei ghare ami
rahilam ei dui bhai
eiteka pravodha diya dui prati murti loiya
aila pandita vidyaman
chari jana danrailo pandita vismaya bhelo
bhave ashru bahaye nayana
puna prabhu kahe tanre tora iccha hoy yare
sei dui rakha nija ghare
tomara pratita lagi tora thai khavo magi
satya satya janiha antare
shuniya pandita raja korila randhana kaja
chari jane bhojana karila
padma malya vastra diya tambuladi samarpiya
sarva ange chandana lepila
nnana mate paratita karyarya phirala chita
dehare rakhila nija ghare
panditera prema lagi dui bhai khaya magi

[p.61]
donhe gela nilachalapuri
pandita karaye seva yakhana ye iccha yeba
seimata karaye vilasa
heno prabhu gauridasa
tara pad kari asha
kahe dina hina krishnadasa
"Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, dancing, with Nityananda who was chanting,
"Hari Hari" arrived at the house of Gauridasa Pandita to bid farewell. Weeping
and weeping in separation, Gauridasa fell at the feet of the Lord and said, 'You
must never leave my house! Please heed my words. Stay here in Ambika Kalna.
This is my humble submission. If you leave me, I shall surely die. You must stay
here. And I will always stay here and view your divine form. You are two
brothers. Stay here at my place, and everyone will be delivered just by seeing you.
Again I submit—don't leave, O Gaurahari: you are the savior of the fallen.'
"The Lord said, 'Gauridasa, allow me to fulfill your hope in this way: I
shall give you an exact copy of Gaura and Nityananda, a murti that you may
worship. By seeing this murti you can think of us. My murti is as good as I am.
Know it for certain that my words are true.'
"Hearing this, Gauridasa, let out a deep breath and began sobbing and
sobbing, wept and wept. Again, the two brothers tried to console him. Still,
nothing they did could steady or pacify him. Thus sings the fallen Krishna dasa
who aspires for the lotus feet of Shri Chaitanya, of how those two brothers stayed
in Ambika Kalna. In ecstasy, Gauridasa Pandit begged the two brothers to stay,

[p.62]
and because Chaitanya and Nityananda are bhakta-vatsala—always affectionate to
his devotees—they were captured by Gauridasa Pandit. He imprisoned those two
Lords in a temple of divine love from which they could not escape.
"Seeing the great anxiety of Gauridasa Pandita, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu said, with great gravity, 'We will stay here at your place. Know for
certain that we two brothers will always stay here in your home.' Consoling him
with these words, those two brothers manifest themselves in the form of two
perfect deity forms.
"The four of them stood there: Gaura-Nityananda and the exact replicas of
Gaura-Nityananda. Gauridas Pandit was stunned. Tears of divine love filled his
eyes. Again the Lord told him, 'Your wish is fulfilled. These two will stay here in
your home forever. You will always internally realize that in this way, at your
home we shall eternally stay and beg to eat the offerings you cook.'
"Hearing this, Gauridasa the king of pandits, began to cook. When the
preparations were ready, he offered everything before his four guests. After this he
offered them garlands made of lotuses and fresh cloth, along with tambula and
other fine things. Then he decorated their limbs with sandalwood pulp.
"After all these various things were realized, it was time for the two Lords
to go. The two Lords left the two Lords standing at the home of Gauridasa Pandita
and left for Jagannatha Puri. To the great satisfaction of Gauridasa Pandita, Gaura
and Nityananda in their replica form stayed at his house and ate the rice he offered
them. In this way, Gauridasa Pandit rendered service to his heart's delight and
enjoyed the pastimes of Gaura and Nityananda. My only hope is to take shelter at

[p.63]
the lotus feet of Gauridasa Pandita. Thus says the fallen Krishnadasa."
One day, just to increase the divine love of Gauridasa Pandita, the murtis
of Shri Gaura-Nityananda decided to revive in Gauridasa Pandita the Vrindavana
conception. At that time they smiled sweetly and said, "O Gauridasa! You were
formerly Subal Shakha. Don't you remember? Together we used to have many
pastimes on the banks of the Yamuna in Vrindavana. While acting in this way,
Shri Gaura and Nitayananda caused Gauridasa to conceive of them in the forms of
Krishna and Balarama. In this way, they appeared in the dress of cowherd boys,
with a stick for driving cows in their hands. Krishna held a flute in his hands and
a peacock feather in his hear. Their necks were decorated with garlands of forest
flowers. Their lotus feet were ornamented with anklets. In this way, they brought
Gauridasa into the mood of his previous conception. In this mood they revealed
different pastimes to Gauridasa Pandit for some time. After this, it was the Lord's
wish that Gauridasa be returned to external consciousness. At that time, Krishna
and Balaram returned to the altar in their forms as Gaura and Nityananda.
Every day, Gauridasa Pandit used to prepare various wonderful edibles for
the pleasure of his deities and offer it to Gaura and Nityananda. He was always
engaged in serving them. He was so absorbed in service that he was completely
unaware of the pleasures and pains of his own body. Gradually, he approached old
age and became feeble and infirm. In this way, although it was difficult for him to
do, he did not cease working hard to cook for his deities. One day, seeing his hard
labor at cooking, Gaura and Nityananda externally appeared very angry, and
refused to eat. At that time, Gauridasa Pandit embraced them affectionately,

[p.64]
saying: "If you don't want to eat this, tell me what you would like me to cook. I'm
ready to cook whatever will make you happy." Saying this, Gauridasa Pandita fell
silent. Smiling, the Lord then said in great seriousness, "There is nothing wrong
with your cooking. But there is no need, at your advanced age, to cook so many
preparations. We can't tolerate seeing you go to such a great effort on our behalf.
We would be happier if you would exert less effort and just do something simple."
Gauridasa Pandit said, "Eat what I have cooked today. In the future, I
won't take such great steps. Everything will be kept simple. I will only cook a
little shak and offer it on a fresh banana leaf." Hearing the words of the Pandit, the
brothers, Gaura and Nityananda, smiled and laughed and ate everything on their
plates.
Once Gauridasa Pandita wanted to decorate Gaura and Nityananda lavishly
with beautiful ornaments. Knowing his mind, Gaura-Nityananda decorated
themselves with ornaments and then got back up on their throne on the altar.
When the pandit entered the temple, he was speechless with delight. He thought,
"Where did they get these ornaments?" In this way, Gaura and Nityananda were
involved in many different kinds of pastimes in the home of Gauridasa Pandita.
Shri Gauridas Pandit's dearmost disciple was Shri Hridaya Chaitanya.
Once around the time of the appearance day of Shri Gauranga, Gauridasa went to
the house of one of his disciples. At that time, he entrusted the service of Shri
Gaura and Nityananda in the care of Hridaya Chaitanya. Hridaya Chaitanya, in
great ecstasy, rendered service to those deities. The festival of Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu's appearance day drew near. When only three days remained before

[p.65]
the big festival that was to take place, Gauridas Pandita still had not returned.
Hridaya Chaitanya became very worried. Acting on his own, he arranged to send
a written message to the different devotees and disciples inviting them to the
festival that would soon be held. Just at that time, Gauridasa Pandita arrived at
his ashram. Hridaya Chaitanya told his guru about how he had sent out invitations
of his own, worried that Gauridasa Pandit would not return in time to do so.
Although Gauridasa Pandit was internally very happy, externally he showed
himself to be very angry with Hridaya Chaitanya's acting independently.
Gauridasa scolded his disciple, saying, "In my presence you are acting
independently, sending invitations here and there as you please and summoning
my disciples at your will. This cannot go on. You cannot stay here."
Hearing this, Hridaya Chaitanya fell at the feet of his guru and offered his
pranams. He went to stay under a tree on the banks of the Ganges. A short time
later a rich merchant came by on a boat and gave a large donation to Hridaya
Chaitanya, saying, "Give this to your guru, Gauridas Pandit." After he went to
Gauridasa and gave him the donation, Hridaya Chaitanya was told by his guru to
hold a big festival on the banks of the Ganges. Taking the order of his guru on his
head, Hridaya Chaitanya began a big festival on the banks of the Ganges.
Gradually all the Vaishnavas in the surrounding areas began to assemble there.
Taking those great souls with him, Hridaya Chaitanya began a wonderful and
superexcellent performance of dancing and chanting the holy name. In the midst
of this kirtan Gaura and Nityananda Themselves appeared, singing and dancing.
Hridaya Chaitanya saw it with his own eyes. In this way Gauridasa Pandita

[p.66]
arranged for a great festival to be held. When the pujari back at the temple, Big
Ganga Dasa Pandit, entered the temple he saw that Gaura and Nityananda were
not on the simhasana, the deity throne on the altar. He went immediately to
Gauridas Pandit to report this incident. The pujari could understand that to
increase the prema of Hridaya Chaitanya, Gaura and Nityananda had gone off and
joined the kirtan. Seeing the amazement of his pujari, Gauridasa Pandit smiled
sweetly. Then, to stop the two brothers from getting away, he took a club in his
hand and went off to the banks of the Ganges to the place where Gaura and
Nityananda had joined in the great kirtan that was going on there. He soon arrived
at the banks of the Ganges where the kirtan was going on. He could see the two
brothers dancing in ecstasy. But when the two brothers, Gaura and Nityananda
saw the angry mood of Gauridas Pandita, they became invisible.
Shri Gauridas Pandit could see that Gaura and Nityananda had entered into
the temple of Hridaya Chaitanya's heart. Beholding this in great wonder and
ecstasy, Gauridasa Pandit could not hold himself back—he began crying tears of
ecstasy. He forgot his external show of anger at the two brothers, and holding his
disicple Shri Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu in his arms, he said, "You are truly
fortunate. From today on your name will be will be "Hridaya Chaitanya:" one
who has Shri Chaitanya within his heart. He drenched Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu
with the water of his tears.
In great humility and overwhelmed with Krishna-prema, Shri Hridaya
Chaitanya fell at the feet of Shri Gauridasa Pandit. After this, Gauridasa took
Hridaya Chaitanya back to his house where they danced and chanted in the

[p.67]
courtyard in the ecstasy of sankirtan. The devotees filled the ten directions with
the loud chanting of "Hari! Hari!" In this way the great festival of the appearance
day of Shri Gauranga came to a close. After this, Shri Gauridasa Pandita blessed
Shri Hridaya Chaitanya with the adhikara or qualifications for divine seva.
On the Shukla Ekadashi in the month of Shravana, Shri Gauridasa Pandita
passed away from this earth and entered into the eternal unmanifest pastimes of
Shri Gauranga and Nityananda. His most important disciple was Hridaya
Chaitanya, whose most important disciple was Shri Shyamananda prabhu. Shri
Narahari Chakravarti Thakura records all the history of Gauri Das Pandit's life and
extolls his glories in the seventh taranga or wave of his book, Bhakti-Ratnakara.
Gopal Bhatta Goswami

Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami was the son of Vyenkatta Bhatta, a brahmana
resident of Shri Rangam, who was initiated in the Shri Sampradaya. The city of
Shri Rangam is located on the Kaveri river in the district of Tanjor about ten miles
west of Kumbhakonam. Regarding this temple. Shri Bhaktivedanta Swami
remarks as follows. "The Shri Rangam temple is the largest in India, and there are
seven walls surrounding it. There are also seven roads leading to Shri Rangam.
The ancient names of these roads are Dharma, Rajamahendra, Kulashekhara,
Alinadana, Tiruvikrama, Tirubidi and Ada-iyavala-indana. The temple was
founded before the reign of Dharmavarma, who reigned before Rajamahendra.
Many celebrated kings like Kulashekhara and others such as Alabandaru, resided
in the temple of Shri Rangam. Yamunacharya, Shri Ramanuja, Sudarshanacharya,

[p.68]
and others also supervised this temple.
According to Bhaktivedanta Swami, "Shri Vyenkatta Bhatta was a
Vaishanva brahmana and an inhabitant of Shri Rangakshetra. He belonged in the
disciplic succession of Shri Ramanujacharya. Shri Rangam is one of the places of
pilgrimage in the province of Tamila-desha. The inhabitants of that province do
not retain the name Vyenkatta. It is therefore supposed that Vyenkatta Bhatta did
not belong to that province, although he may have been residing there for a very
long time. Vyenkatta Bhatta was a membin a branch of the Ramanuja
Sampradaya known as Badagala-i. He had a brother in the Ramanuja Sampradaya
known as Shripada Prabodhananda Saraswati. The son of Vyenkatta Bhatta was
later known in the Gaudiya Sampradaya as Gopala Bhatta Goswami and he
established the Radha-ramana temple in Vrindavana. More information about him
may be found in a book known as Bhakti-Ratnakara (1.100)by Shri Narahari
Cakravarti.
The Gaura-parshada-charitavali describes the life of Gopala Bhatta
Goswami as follows. The merciful Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, in order to
deliver the souls of this world, as well as to distribute krishna-prema everywhere,
walked throughout the length and breadth of South India and moved from place to
place inundating every town and village with the nectar of the divine name.
Drinking the nectar of the holy name from the lotus mouth of Shri Chaitanya
Mahrapbhu Himself, thousands and thousands of men and women who were
burning in the desert of material existence, quenched their thirst. Thus their lives
were freed from the burning of material life, and their souls were cooled. Day

[p.69]
after day, the fallen people in general drank the nectar of Krishna's holy name and
thus attained life's supreme treasure.
In order to shower nama-prema far and wide like a great thundercloud,
Shriman Mahaprabhu came to stay for some time at the great holy place of Shri
Rangakshetra. Shri Ranganath's huge and expansive temple is so tall that it
appears to reach the heavens. That great temple has seven huge walls. Millions of
devotees come to see that deity every year. Within the temple, the brahmanas are
constantly chanting the glories of Shri Ranganatha. When Shri Gauranga
Mahaprabhu entered that temple and began chanting Hare Krishna in kirtan, his
song was far sweeter than that of millions of Gandharvas. Everyone was stunned
and astonished, and the hairs of their body stood on end. His divine figure was
wonderful to behold, and his bodily radiance was dazzling. From his lotus eyes
showered torrents of tears of Krishna-prema. The brahmanas wondered, "Is he a
god? Is such a manifestation of ecstasy possible in a man?"
Again and again exhorting everyone to chant the holy name, saying,
"Haribolo! Haribolo!" he was drowning in the tears that poured from his lotus
eyes, as he fell before the deities like a tree that has been cut down. Everyone
thought that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared like a golden mountain that had
fallen to the earth.
Shri Vyenkatta Bhatta, detecting in Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu the
symptoms of a Mahapurush, a great personage, could not contain himself as he
saw the Lord performing sankirtan. His heart leaped with joy as it became filled
with bhakti. Pushing his way through the crowd, he joined the kirtan party and

[p.70]
lost himself in dancing and singing the holy name of Hari with the Lord. When
the Lord had regained his external consciousness somewhat and had steadied
himself, Vyenkatta fell in the dust of his lotus feet and asked the Lord for his
mercy. The Lord, saying, "Krishna! Krishna!" heartily embraced him. At that
time, Shri Vyenkatta invited the Lord to stay with him in his home during the four
months of the rainy season. At his home Vyenkatta Bhatta washed the Lord's lotus
feet and drank the holy water. In this way there was great joy within the home of
Vyenkatta Bhatta.
The above has been briefly described in the Chaitanya Charitamrita as
follows (ML 9.79—86):
papa-nasane vishnu kailo darasane,
shri-ranga-ksetre tabe karila gamana
kaverite snana kari dekhi ranganatha
stuti pranati kari manila krtartha
premaveshe kaila bhauta gana nartena
dekhi camatkara haila saba lokera mana
shri vaishnava eka—vyenkatta bhatta nam
prabhure nimantrana kaila kariya sammana
nija-ghare laya kaila pada praksalana
sei jala kaila sa-vamse bhakshana
bhiksha karaya kichu kaila nivedana
caturmasya asi prabhu haila upasanna
caturmasya kripa kari raha mora ghare

[p.71]
krishna-katha kahi kripaya uddhara amare
tanra ghare rahila prabhu krishna-katha rasa
bhatta-sange gonaila sukhe cari mase.
"After visiting the holy place named Shiva-ketra, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu arrived
at Papanashana and there saw the temple of Lord Vishnu. Then He finally reached
Shri Ranga-kshetra. After bathing in the river Kaveri, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
saw the temple of Ranganatha and offered his ardent prayers and obeisances. Thus
He felt Himself successful. In the temple of Ranganatha, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu chanted and danced in ecstatic love of Godhead. Seeing His
performance, everyone was struck with wonder. One Vaishnava known as
Vyenkatta Bhatta then invited Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to his home with great
respect. Shri Vyenkatta Bhatta took Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to his home.
After he washed the Lord's feet, all the members of his family drank the water.
After offerin lunch to the Lord, Vyenkatta Bhatta submitted that the period of
Chaturmasya had already arrived. Vyenkatta Bhatta said, 'Please be merciful to me
and stay at my house during Chaturmasya. Speak about Lord Krishna's pastimes
and kindly deliver me by your mercy.' Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu remained at
the house of Vyenkatta Bhatta for four continuous months. In this way, The Lord
passed His days in great happiness, enjoying the transcendental mellow of
discussing Lord Krishna's pastimes. "
In the year 1511, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at the house of
Vyenkatta Bhatta. At that time Vyenkatta Bhatta lived with his two brothers,
Prabodananda Saraswati and Trimalla Bhatta. At that time, Shri Prabodhananda

[p.72]
Saraswati was a tridandi sannyasi of the Ramanuja Sampradaya and Vyenkatta
Bhatta and Trimalla Bhatta were also Vaishnavas in the Ramanuja Sampradaya.
Vyenkatta's son was Gopala Bhatta. At the time of Mahaprabhu's visit, he was
only a child. When the little boy offered his respects at the feet of Shri Chaitanya,
the Lord picked him up and held him on his lap, affectionately embracing the boy.
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu used to call the boy and give him the remnants of his
prasadam. By giving him his prasada in this manner, he was blessing Gopal Bhatta
Acharya to become a great acharya in the future.
The Lord arrived in Shri Rangam during the time of Chaturmasya. At
that time he stayed in the house of Vyenkatta Bhatta. In Shri Rangam live many
Shri Vaishanvas. Seeing the manifestation of divine sentiments in Shri Chaitanya,
however, many of them were converted, for they experienced the nectar of
Krishna-prema. Every day, one brahmana Vaishanva after another invited the
Lord to take lunch. In this way, during the four months of Chaturmasya, the Lord
accepted many invitations, and still could not honor all the invitations of the many
Vaishnava grihasthas who wanted to show their hospitality to the Lord.
The Lord stayed at the house of Vyenkatta Bhatta. Every day, Shri Gopala
Bhatta would serve him personally. At that time, Shri Chaitanya instructed
Vyenkatta Bhatta on the position of Lakshmidevi and the worship of LakshmiNarayan versus the position of the gopis and the worship of Radha-Govinda. The
Lord preached these points to him in a humourous style, laughing and joking in a
clever way. The Lord said, "Bhatta! Your Lakshmidevi is the crest jewel of chaste
ladies. My Krishna is a gopa-boy who herds cows. Why does she want to be with

[p.73]
Krishna?"
Vyenkatta Bhatta said, "Krishna and Narayana are one and the same.
Krishna is one of the forms Our Lord takes in order to enjoy pastimes of a clever
and sporting nature. There is no violation of Lakshmidevi's chastity if she takes an
interest in Krishna—he is one and the same with Narayan. This is not in
contradiction with any religious principles. Therefore why do you joke with me in
this way?"
The Lord said, "What you say is true. But tell me, why is it that
Lakshmidevi performs great penances to attain Krishna, but cannot do so? On the
other hand, the Upanishads also performed penances to attain Krishna and did so.
How is it that the Upanishads succeeded in entering Vrindavan and getting
Krishna's association where Lakshmidevi failed?"
Vyenkatta said, "I cannot understand this at all." At this point he said,
"You are Krishna Himself. You know the meaning of your own pastimes. Only
those who you choose to enlighten can understand all these things. If you
enlighten me, then I can also understand them."
At that time, Shri Chaitanya explained that Lakshmidevi wanted to remain
in her position as the opulent goddess of fortune in Vaikuntha and at the same time
enter into the pastimes of Krishna, where sweetness and beauty are superior to
power and opulence. This is not possible. Only those who follow in the footsteps
of the gopis and the residents of Vrindavana can attain such a position. The
Upanishads succeeded where Lakshmidevi failed because they followed in the
footsteps of the Gopis. Before this explanation was given Vyenkatta Bhatta

[p.74]
thought that Shri Naryana was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thinking in
this way, he believed that the worship of Naryana was the supreme form of
worship. Mahaprabhu understood his misconception and corrected it through
joking about it. After this, Vyenkatta was convinced of the Supreme position of
Krishna and Vrindavan, and converted to the cause of Gaudiya Vaishnavism,
although he was raised in the Ramanuja Sampradaya. He offered his respects at
the lotus feet of the Lord and the Lord embraced him.
Inthis way, the Lord spent the four months of the rainy season at the home
of Vyenkatta, discussing many things about Krishna and His pastimes. After this,
he bid farewell. The happy home of the Bhattas was plunged into tears. Gopal
Bhatta fainted at the Lord's lotus feet. The Lord gave some consolation to Gopal
Bhatta saying, "Now you must serve at the home of your mother and father. Later,
you must come to Vrindavan. There you will constantly hear and glorify the holy
name of Shri Krishna. In this way, after instructing the whole family, Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu went on his way.
Within a short time, Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami learned Sanskrit
grammar, poetry, rhetoric and became expert in all the scriptures, beginning with
the Vedanta sutra. His uncle, Shripad Prabodhananda Saraswati instructed him
extensively in the different bhakti-shastras. His scholarship was unparalleled.
After he had been blessed by having darshan of the lotus feet of Shri
Gauranga, Gopal Bhatta Goswami's mind was always absorbed in thoughts of the
Lord's lotus feet. He began thinking, "When will I again obtain a vision of the
Lord?" Day and night he posed this question in his mind and could think of

[p.75]
nothing else. And yet, he thought, "I cannot just give up my aging father and
mother and go away." In this way, some time went by. At length his mother and
father arrived at their final days. They called Gopal Bhatta to their side and said,
"Boy, after we pass away, you must go to Vrindavana and take shelter of the lotus
feet of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu." Taking the order of his mother and father on
his head, Gopala Bhatta went to Vrindvana, always remembering the lotus feet of
Mahaprabhu.
When Gopal Bhatta arrived in Vrindavana, he found that Rupa Goswami
was preparing to send messages with some devotees from Vrindavan to Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in Puri. Shri Rupa and Shri Sanatana Prabhu already knew
that Gopal Bhatta would be coming to Vrindavan. Shri Rupa and Sanatana greeted
him and treated him like a brother. From that time on, their lifelong friendship
began.
When the messengers arrived in Puri, Mahaprabhu was happy to receive
them. He heard from them of how Gopal Bhatta had come to Vrindavana. He sent
the messenger from Vrindavan back to Rupa Goswami with the kaupin and outer
garments of the babaji order, to be given to Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami as
symbols of his renunciation. Shri Rupa received these things with great joy. Shri
Gopal Bhatta Goswami accepted the loincloth and dress of a babaji with great
happiness, considering it to the Lord's mercy and prasada. In this way he went on.
He was very close to Rupa and Sanatana. he would pass his nights at different
kundas, and spent all his time studying the shastra and writing.
Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami had twelve shalagram shilas. He used to keep

[p.76]
them in a cloth bag hung round his neck. Still, he had a mind to worship the shri
vigraha of the Lord in his deity form. At this time a rich man went to see Shri
Gopal Bhatta Goswami. Having seen him, he was very happy. Eager to serve, the
rich man offered some fine cloth and ornaments for the service of the Lord. Shri
Gopal Bhatta placed these things before his shalagrams. The wealthy man bid
Gopal Bhatta goodbye.
That night, Shri Bhatta Goswami offered aroti and bhoga and put his
shalagrams to rest, covering them carefully in a basket. At last, late that night
Gopal Bhatta after performing different kinds of bhajan, took some prasada and
went to rest. The next morning he bathed in the Yamuna. When he went to wake
his shalagram and opened the basket, he saw, in the midst of the shalagrams,
something divine. One of the shalagram shilas had become a full-fledged deity of
Krishna with a three-fold bending form, who stood there looking very beautiful.
Seeing the unprecedented beauty of this deity, Gopala Bhatta's happiness took the
shape of a great ocean in which he was diving and surfacing. Offering his full
dandavats to the deity, he began offering different hymns and prayers to the Lord.
Hearing this beautiful language, Shri Rupa Goswami and Shri Sanatana Goswami,
as well as the other Vaishnavas and Goswamis, quickly went there and saw the
world-enchanting beauty of the deity as tears of divine love flowed from their eyes
and wet the earth. In the year 1599 of the Christian era, on the full moon day of
Vaishakha, this deity form of Krishna became manifest. The Goswamis named
this deity, "Shri Radha-ramana-deva."
After a time, Shri Gopala Bhatta Goswami went to a town called

[p.77]
Devavandya Gram in Saharan Pura near Haridwara. There he was received with
great delight by the residents. One day, he was on his way to the house of a
devotee near the edge of the town. In the afternoon, there was a great storm. On
the road was the house of a brahmana in which Gopal Bhatta took shelter. This
brahmana was very devoted to Krishna. He saw to the needs of Shri Bhatta
Goswami with great care. Shripad Gopal Bhatta Goswami was very happy. The
brahmana had no son. Gopal Bhatta blessed him, saying, "May you have a son
who is a great devotee of Krishna." The brahmana then said, "I shall give you my
first son to engage in the service of Krishna as you see fit."
Shri Bhatta Goswami stayed in Saharanapur and preached the holy name
of Hari for a few days before returning to Vrindavana. At that time he went to the
Gandaki river and retrieved twelve shalagram shilas from the river. One of these
shalagramas was the one from which the deity of Radha-ramana-deva later
manifest himself.
Almost ten years past since this time. One day, Shri Gopal Bhatta
Goswami went to take his noon bath in the Yamuna and afterwards returned to his
kutir to perform his bhajan. From a distance he culd see a young boy sitting in the
door of his hut. When the boy saw Shri Bhatta Goswami he arose and offered his
obeisances at the Goswami's feet. Shri Gopal Bhatta asked him, "Who are you?"
He boy said, "I am from Devavandya Gram in Saharan Pura. I have come from
there."
Bhatta Goswami said, "Who is your father?" Why have you come to me?"
The boy said, "My father has sent me here to engage in your service. My name is

[p.78]
Gopinatha." With this, Gopal Bhatta remembered his previous conversation with
the boy's father, in which the brahmana said he would give the Goswami his son to
engage in the service of the Lord. After this time, Shri Gopinatha served Shri
Bhatta Goswami with great attention and regard.
Subsequently that boy became known as Shri Gopinatha Pujari Goswami.
He remained a brahmachari and served the Radha-ramana deity up until his death.
Eventually his younger brother Shri Damodara Dasa took mantra initiation from
Shri Gopinathaji and also engaged in the service of Shri Radharamana. Shri
Damoadara Dasa had three sons, Harinatha, Mathuranatha, and Harinama.
Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami served his beloved Radha-ramana deity
constantly, remembering the words and teachings of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
While serving in this way, the eyes of Gopal Bhatta were often filled with tears of
divine love that flowed like torrential rain. Whereupon Shri Radha-ramana deva
bestowed upon Shri Bhatta Goswami a divine vision of Shri Gauranga Himself.
"When Shri Bhatta Goswami was overwhelmed by Krishna-prema, Shri Radharamana revealed himself as Shri Gauranga deva." Bhakti Ratnakara 4th Taranga.
Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami Shrinivasa Acharya gave mantra-diksha to
Shrinivasa Acharya. Shrimad Sanatana Goswami composed Hari Bhakti Vilasa in
collaboration with Gopal Bhatta Goswami, who edited the work. Sanatana
Goswami had such great affection for Gopal Bhatta Goswami that he even
published the book under his name. Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami was responsible
for originating the six thesis of Shat Sandarbha later elaborately developed by Shri
Jiva Goswami. Jiva Goswami writes in the beginning of his Tattva-Sandrarbha: "A

[p.79]
devotee from Souh India who was born of a brahmana family and was a very
intimate friend of Rupa Goswami and Sanatana Goswami has written a book that
he has not compiled systematically. Therefore I, a tiny living entity called jiva, am
trying to assort the events of the book systematically, consulting the direction of
great personalities like Madhva, Shridhara Swami and Ramanujacharya. Gopal
Bhatta Goswami has written a foreward to Jiva Goswami's Sat Sandarbha. He
wrote a commentary on Krishna-Karnamrita. He also wrote Sat-Kriya-Sara
Dipika, a guide to Vaishnava samskaras and rituals for birth ceremonies, sacred
thread initiations, marriage ceremonies, sannyasa, and funerals etc. In addition to
this he composed many other scriptures.
In the Gaura-Gandodesha-Dipika, Shri Kavi Karnapura Goswami writes:
ananga-manjari sadya gopala bhattakah
bhatta goswaminam kocidahuh shri guna manjari
"In my opinion, that person who in Vrindavana was Ananga Manjari is now Gopal
Bhatta Goswami. Some authorities, however, have given their opinion that he was
Guna Manjari."
Shri Gopala Bhatta Goswami was born in the year 1503 of the Christian
era on the 13th day of the dark moon in the month of Pausha. Shrimad Gopal
Bhatta Goswami lived within this world for 75 years. In the Christian year of
1578 on the sixth day of the dark moon, Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami left this
world behind and entered into the eternal pastimes of the Lord.

Shri Gopala Guru Goswami

[p.80]
Shri Gopala Guru Goswami was a disciple of Shri Vakreshwara Pandit. He was a
brahmana from Utkala. From early childhood, he stayed with Vakreshwara Pandit
and remained under his care and guidance. Shriman Mahaprabhu was always very
affectionate towards him and played many jokes on him. Out of affection, the lord
would jokingly call him "guru," and so he became known as Gopal Guru
Goswami.
Under the authority of Shri Svarupa Damodara and Raghunatha Dasa
Goswami, he was instructed in the system of rasa and attained expertise in the
rasik principles. At the place where Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu stayed at the
house of Kashi Mishra, Vakreshwara Pandita later stayed. After Shri
Vakreshwara Pandit passed away, Gopal Guru Goswami stayed at that place,
where he installed the deities Shri Shri Radha-Kanta.
Shri Gopal Guru Goswami composed a book called Smarana-paddhati, or
The System for Remembering the Lord. This book has twenty-six chapters. A
disciple of Shri Gopal Guru Goswami's was Shri Dhayanachandra Goswami, an
important acharya in the Gaudiya Sampradaya. He wrote a book called the
Dhyana Chandra Paddhati.
Shrila Narottama Dasa Thakura visited the house of Kashi Misrha when he
went to

[p.81]
Jagannatha Puri. There he met Gopal Guru Goswami. (B.R.8.382) Shri According
to some, Gopal Guru Goswami was the gopi known as Tungavidya Sakhi. On the
ninth day of the full moon in the month of Karttika he entered into the unmanifest
pastimes of the Lord.

SRI ISHVARA PURI

Srimad Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami writes: "All glories to Madhavendra Puri,
the storehouse of all Krishna-prema! He is a desire tree of bhakti, and it is to him
that the seed of bhakti first fructified. The seed of Krishna-prema next fructified in
the for of Sri Ishvara Puri, and then the gardener himself, Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
became the main trunk of the tree of bhakti." Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
comments on this section of the Caitanya Caritamrita (CC Adi 9.10): "
Sri Isvara Puri was a resident of Kumarahatts. (At this place there is now a
railway station known as Kamarhatty. Nearby there is also another station named
Halisahara, which belongs to the eastern railway that runs from the eastern section
of Calcutta). Isvara Puri appeared in a brahmin family and was the most beloved
disciple of Sri Madhavendra Puri."

The nature of Sri Ishvara Puri's personal devotional service to the lotus feet of his
guru, Sri Madhavendra Puri, is mentioned in another part of the Caitanya
Caritamrita by Kaviraj Goswami as follows: "At the last stage of his life, Sri
Madhavendra Puri became an invalid and was completely unable to move, and

[p.82]
Isvara Puri so completely engaged himself in his service that he personally cleaned
up his stool and urine. Always chanting the Hare Krishna maha-mantra and
reminding Sri Madhavendra Puri about the pastimes of Lord Krishna in the last
stage of his life, Ishvara Puri gave the best service among his disciples. Thus
Madhavendra Puri, being very pleased with him, blessed him, saying, 'may you
have Krishna prema.' Thus Ishavara Puri, by the grace of his spirutal master, Sri
Madhavendra Puri, became a great devotee in the ocean of love of Godhead."

Srila Prabhupada Bhaktivedanta points out in his commentary on this verse, "It is
by the mercy of the spiritual master that one becomes perfect, as vividly
exemplified here. A Vaishnava is always protected by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but if he appears to be an invlaid, this gives a chance to his disciples to
serve him. Ishvara Puri pleaed his piritual master by service, and by the blessings
of his spiritual master he became such a great personality that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu accepted him as his spiritual master. "

Before Initiationg Sri Caitanya, Ishvara Puri stayed at the house of Gopinath
Acarya in Nabadwip-dham. There he lived for a few months. At that time he met
Sri Caitanya, when he was Nimai Pandit, and requested him to help him with his
book, Krishna-lilamrita. The Lord was highly pleased with Ishvara Puri's devotion
and highly praised his book, saying that it was faultless. Still, when he was
pressed, he made some corrections with his own lotus hands. This pastime is
elaborately described in the Caitanya Bhagavata. The following is a synopsis of

[p.83]
Vrindavan Das Thakur's account of Sri Ishavara Puri.

When Mother Sachi saw that Sri Caitanya was happily engaged in his studies, her
own ecstasy increased. At that time, Sri Ishvara Puri came to Nabadwipa in
disguise. Caitanya Bhagavata records that Ishavara Puri was overwhelmed with
the ecstasy of Krishna-rasa. And yet, as he was very dear to Krishna, he was also
very humble and didn't want to attract any attention to himself as a great devotee.
So that no one would know who he was, he hid his real identity and went to the
temple of Advaita.

Upon arriving there, he found that Advaita was busy in service to the Lord in the
temple, so he came in and sat down very cautiously and timidly. But the power of
a great Vaishnava is not easily hidden from another great Vaishnava. Again and
again, Advaita Acaraya kept looking away from his duties in the direction of
Ishvara Puri. finally he asked him "O Father! who art thou?"

With great humility, Ishvara introduced himself, saying, "I am a sudra of the
lowest class." In this way, the jewel of learned scholars and the best of the
renounced, Ishvara Puri, showed how humility is the true ornament of a
Vaishnava.

Immediately upon seeing him, Mukunda Datta recognized that Ishavara Puri was a
Vaishnava Sannyasi. At that time, Mukunda Datta very sweetly began to perform

[p.84]
Krishna-lila kirtan. Vrindavan Das asks, Who is there who can remain unmoved
when Mukunda Datta performs his sweet kirtan? Upon hearing the deeply
moving songs of Mukunda Datta, Sri Ishvara Puri lost his composure and fainted
on the ground in a trance of deep ecstasy. Tears of ecstasy rained forth from his
eyes. The assembled devotees were dumbstruck upon seeing such a display of
transcendental emotion. When their power of speech returned, they all remarked
that nowhere had any of them ever seen a Vaishnava such as this. Sri Advaita
Acarya also began to experience grave symptoms of transcendental emotion.
After this, they all concluded their visitor must be none other than the dearmost
disciple of Madhavendra Puri—Sri Ishvara Puri. At this, they all joyously began
chanting the holy name of Krishna, saying, "Hari! Hari!" over and over again.

Sri ishavara Puri stayed in Nabadwipa for a while. One day, the footpath near
where he stayed was blessed by the divine footsteps of Sri Gaurasundara.
Mahaprabhu was going home from school. Upon seeing Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, Ishavara Puri was amazed by his perfect body and supremely grave
disposition. He wanted to somehow make contact with the Lord. Finally, he
called out, "O best of the brahmins! What is your name? Where is your house?
And what book are you reading?"

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with great humility offered his humble obeisances to Sri
Ishvara Puri. Mahaprabhu's disciples said, "His name is Nimai Pandit." Ishavara
Puri said, "You are THE Nimai Pandit!?" Ishavara Puri's joy knew no bounds.

[p.85]
Mahaprabhu with great humility bowed his head and said, "Sripada, have mercy
upon me and kindly grace my house with your company. This very afternoon we
shall prepare prasada for your pleasure. Please accept it. With these sweet and
humble words, Mahaprabhu extended his invitation to Ishavara Puri. Accepting
the invitation, Ishavara Puri went to the house of Mahaprabhu.

Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu washed the lotus feet of Ishavara Puri with his own
hands. Sri Saci devi quickly prepared various wonderful kinds of preparations and
offered them to the Deity. After it had been offered, Mahaprabhu accepted it.

Later, the two of them entered the temple of Vishnu and discussed Krishna with
each other at great length. And gradually Krishna-prema sprang up in their hearts
and flooded them with the ecstasy of love of Godhead.

In this way, for one month, Sri Ishavara Puri stayed at the house of Sri Gopinatha
Acarya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu would constantly invite Ishavra Puri to visit
him. And from time to time Ishvara Puri would invite Mahaprabhu to visit him.

At this time, Sri Gadadhara was a young boy. Sri Ishvara Puri was very
affectionate to him. He would read to Gadadhara from the book he had written,
"Shri Krishna-Lilamrita." Every day around sunrise Mahaprabhu would come and
offer his obeisances to Sri Ishavara Puri. One day, Ishvara Puri told Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, " You are the topmost of pundits; I am writing a book about

[p.86]
krishna's pastimes. You must help me by pointing out whatever faults you may
find in this work. This will give me great pleasure. Sitting at the holy feet of Sri
Ishvara Puri and hearing these words, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu smiled and said,
"The words of Krishna's devotees are as good as Krishna himself. They are in the
same category as he is, they are from his "alphabet," not from any material
alphabet. Such words are not mundane. One who finds fault with Krishna or his
devotees is a great sinner. What a bhakta writes is not mere poetry; it is
completely different—it is dear to Krishna, and so is perfect."
"A devotee's prayers of love for Krishna have nothing to do with the rules of
grammar and does not depend on them. Krishna is only interested in the love in
such prayers. They are dear to Krishna in any case, whether they are properly
constructed according to the rules of grammar or not. One who looks for faults in
the words of a devotee will never be pleasing to Krishna."
Upon hearing Caitanya Mahaprabhu's words, Ishvara Puri felt as if his senses had
been drenched in nectar. Ishvara Puri could understand that Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Person. A
few days later, Ishvara Puri left Navadwip with some devotees to continue visiting
the holy places of pilgrimage.

In this way, Sri Gaurasundara's pastimes of scholarship reached their completion,
and the Lord wanted to manifest his divinity. He wanted to reveal himself and
distribute the nectar of the holy name of Krishna, and inundate the world in
Krishna-prema, thus delivering the world.

But first, he went to Gaya to offer

[p.87]
oblations to his ancestors. At that time, Sri Ishavara Puri was in Gaya.

After staying in Gaya for some time, When Mahaprabhu had finished his
offerings to his ancestors, he went to complete his worship of the lotus feet of
Vishnu. when he had darhsan of the holy feet of the Lord, and had heard the
glories of the Lord he began to drown in the ecstasy of love of Godhead, and fell
to the ground in wonder and delight. By divine arrangement, it was at that time
that Ishvara Puri arrived. Upon seeing Sri Gaurasundara, he became speechless.
Candrashekaracarya, who was close by was informed of all this. A little time
later, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu returned to external consciousness and saw
Ishavara Puri nearby. At once he arose and then offered his humble obeisances at
the lotus feet of Sri Ishvara Puri.

At that time, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Sri Ishvara Puri heartily embraced one
another. Soon the two of them were drowning in an ocean of tears that poured
incessantly from their lotus eyes. At that time, Mahaprabhu said, "Now my visit to
Gaya has really been fruitful, as by coming here I have had the chance to see your
lotus feet. By traveling to a holy place and offering pinda one may deliverer one's
ancestors—that is the person who offers the pinda may deliver only his ancestors.
But one who sees you automatically delivers millions of ancestors, and not only
will they become free from certain of their sins, but they will all attain eternal
deliverance from material bondage. Therefore this pilgrimage I have undertaken
is unparalleled, because of your holiness having rendered everything perfectly

[p.88]
auspicious.

In this way, Sri Caitanya mahaprabhu in great humility told Ishvara Puri, "All my
visiting of holy places has become perfect because I have seen you. A saintly
person is a real "tirtha," or holy place, since he sanctifies the holy places by his
very presence. Therefore you are the supreme fulfillment of all holy places. All
the holy places pray for the dust of your lotus feet. O Ishvara Puri, in the same
way, I am praying for the dust of your lotus feet, knowing which I shall become
free from the ocean of repeated birth and death and drink the nectar of divine rasa
at the lotus feet of Sri Krishna. Because you alone can free me from the ocean of
repeated birth and death, I offer you this body to do with as you wish. You alone
can make me drink the nectar of divine rasa at the lotus feet of Krishna, and my
desire is that you grant me this gift."

Hearing this from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Ishavara Puri spoke as follows:
"Listen Pandit: Upon seeing your learning and character, I can understand that
you are divinity Himself, descended amongst men. This very day, I had a
beautiful dream. In my dream were many people, and their hands were laden
with fruit. O Pandit! To speak truthfully, upon seeing you, I am filled with an
unusual feeling of transcendental bliss that surpasses ordinary joy. In fact, after I
first saw you in Nabadwipa-dhama, from that time on, I couldn't think of anything
else but you. I didn't want to think of anything else but you. I am speaking the
truth! Upon seeing you I am as happy as if I were seeing Krishna Himself!

[p.89]
Upon hearing all this, Mahaprabhu humbly lowered his head in respect and
smiling, said: "I am supremely fortunate."

A few days later, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in a mood of great humility sought
out Ishavara Puri and said, "Your holiness, please show mercy upon me and
initiate me in the Gayatri mantram as your disciple. For want of the Gayatri
mantra my mind is very much disturbed. "

Sri Ishvara Puri, upon hearing the words of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was very
happy and spoke as follows: "Whether I am giving you my words in speech or a
mantra, it is my life I wish to give you; I wish to give you everything I have."

After this, Sri Ishvara Puri initiated Sri Gaurasundara in the divine mantra. One
day, Sri Ishvara Puri came to the residence of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Upon
seeing him, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu became ecstsatic. He offered his obeisances
and all proper respects and greetings and begged him to stay for lunch.
Ishvara Puri said, "I would consider myself extremely fortunate to accept some
rice from your lotus hand." Mahaprabhu cooked with his own hands and with
great care fed Sri Ishavara Puri. After lunch, the Lord smeared sandalwood pulp
over the limbs of Sri Ishvara Puri and offered him a nice garland of flowers.

In this way, in order to acquaint us with the way in which to properly worship the

[p.90]
guru, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has instructed us all by his personal example how
to serve the guru-parampara. One who does not undertand how to honor a saintly
person can never attain Krishna-prema-bhakti. Service to the lotus feet of the guru
is the gateway to Krishna-bhakti.

When Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu was returning to Nabadwipa from Gaya, he
passed through Kurmarhatta, the divine birthplace of Shri Ishvara Puri. Upon
arriving there, he became filled with divine love and his voice choked up in
ecstasy. He soaked the earth with the tears of divine love from his lotus eyes.
Before he left Kumarahatta, he went to the place of Ishavara Puri's birth and took
some dust from his birthsite. As he left for Nabadwipa, he announced, "This dust
is my life and soul!" After this, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa and
went to Jagannatha Puri on the order of his mother. At that time, Sri Ishvara Puri
had finished his role in the Lord's manifest pastimes. At the time of his passing
into the unmanifest pastimes of the Lord, he ordered his two disciples, Govinda
and Kashishvara Pandit to live near Mahaprabhu and render service to Him.

Srila Bhaktisiddhanta has written: "The best of sannyasis, Madhavendra Puri had
as his foremost disciples Ishvara Puri, Nityananda and the great Advaita. In order
to honor Sri Ishavara Puri, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the guru of the whole world
accepted him as his spiritual master.

[p.91]
Jagadish Pandit

"Shri Jagadish Pandit was the savior of the world. He was a thundercloud
of Krishna prema who rained showers of mercy upon everyone. (CC Adi 11.30)
Shri Jagadish Pandit took birth in Gohati. His father's name was Shri Kamalaksha
Bhatta, and he was the son of Bhatta Narayana. Jagadish Pandit's father and
mother were both great devotees of Lord Vishnu. After they passed away,
Jagadish Pandit, along with his wife, went to live near the Ganges. Jagadish
Pandit's wife was named Dukhini Devi. Jagadish Pandit's younger brother,
Mahesh Pandit also wanted to live near the Ganges, and so he accompanied them
on their journey. They moved nearby the house of Shri Jagannatha Mishra, in
Mayapura.
In Bhaktivinod Thakur's Anubhashya commentary on Caitanya
Caritamrita, (CC Adi 11.30) there is further information about Jagadish Pandit:
"He lived in the village of Yashora Gram in the district of Nadia near the
Chakadoha railway station. Shri Gaurasundara ordered Jagadish Pandit to preach
the glories of the holy name of Krishna in Jagannatha Puri. On the order of
Mahaprabhu, he went to Puri and there, taking permission from Lord Jagannatha,
brought a Shri Murti of Jagannatha back to Yashora Grama, where the deity was
installed. It is said that Jagadish Pandit carried him on a stick. At present the stick
used to bear the Jagannatha deity by Jagadish Pandit is on display at the
Jagannatha temple in Yashora Gram."
Shri Gaurasundara and Shri Nityananda Prabhu used to visit Yashora Gram
from time to time and hold sankirtan festivals. Shri Jagadish Pandit had a son
named Ramabhadra Goswami. At the temple in Yashora Grama there are deities
of Jagannatha Dev, Shri Radha-Vallabha, and Gaura Gopal. It is said that the
Gaura Gopal deities were installed by Jagadish Pandit's wife, Dukhini Devi. The
Gaura Gopal deities are a yellow color. It is said that once, after holding a festival
at the house of Jagadish Pandit for many days, Shri Gaurasundara was about to

[p.92]
depart for Puri. Jagadish Pandit's wife was overwhelmed with the pain of
separation. At that time, Shri Gaurasundara gave her the Gaura Gopal murtis,
saying, "I shall live eternally in your home in my deity form." The Gaura Gopal
murtis have been worshiped ever since that time.
According to the Gaura-Ganoddesh Dipika: "Some say that in Krishna-lila
Jagadish Pandita and Hiranya were formerly the nagapatnis, wives of the serpent
Kaliya. Others, however, are of the opinion that Jagadish Pandit was formerly a
dancer named Chandrahas. They say that just as Chandrahas used to take pleasure
in dancing before Lord Krishna, Jagadish Pandit used to enjoy dancing in the
sankirtan party of Shri Chaitanya."
Once, when Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was a little boy, he came to the house
of Jagadish and Hiranya on Ekadashi and made them feed him grains. This is
described in Chaitanya Bhagavata: "The Lord said, 'If you want me to live, then
take me to the house of the two brahmanas, Hiryana and Jagadish. They are
devotees, and they have prepared a nice offering for the Lord. Although the
devotees must fast on Ekadashi, Vishnu is not bound by such a restriction. He eats
what He wants. If I eat the entire offering to Vishnu made by those devotees, I
shall be able to live, otherwise not."
One day, baby Nimai was crying without cessation. Everyone said, "Boy!
What do you want? Whatever you want you shall get. The boy said, "Today is
Ekadashi. At the house of Hiranya and Jagadish many wonderful offerings of
bhoga have been made. If I can eat all these nice things, I will be happy." Hearing
the impossible demands of the child, Shri Sachimata struck her head with her hand
in amazement. Everyone else was astonished to hear the child's words, and then
they all smiled. "How does a child know what is Ekadashi?" The ladies said,
"Little boy! If you stop your tears, we shall see that you get what you want."
When Jagadish Pandit and Hiranya heard the sweet and charming words of the
boy, they were completely satisfied, and let him eat the Lord's offering to his
heart's content, even though it was Ekadashi, a day on which devotees fast from
grains. Jagadish and Hiranya were great friends of Jagannatha Mishra. They had
previously known that the Supreme Lord Hari had taken birth as the son of

[p.93]
Jagannatha Mishra. Thus, they were more than happy to satisfy whatever demands
Nimai had. They therefore jokingly told the boy, "Little boy! You have eaten
what was meant for Krishna!" And as little Gaurasundara ate his rice to his heart's
content, Jagadish and Hiranya saw revealed before them the form of baby Krishna
Himself. He had a complexion the color of a new monsoon cloud, his effulgence
was brilliant as lightning, and his head was decorated with a beautiful peacock
feather. In this way, Shri Gaurasundara manifest a wonderful miracle before
Hiranya and Jagadish as he sat and ate his rice with great bliss. Upon seeing that
wonderful form, Hiranya and Jagadish were filled with transcendental ecstasy and
began chanting "Hari! Hari!"
It was probably after Mahaprabhu's sannyasa that Hiranya and Jagadish
left Mayapura and went to live in Yashora Gram. Every yearhe would accompany
the devotees from Bengal who would to go to Puri to see Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu for the Rathayatra festival. He was also present at Nityananda
Prabhu's yogurt and chipped rice sankirtan festival in Panihati.
The thirteenth day after the full moon in the month of Pausha marks the
passing of Shri Jagadish Pandit Prabhu.

Shri Jagannatha Dasa Babaji

gauravirbhava-bhumes tvam, nirdestha saj-jana-priyah
vaishnava-sarvabhaumah shri-jagannathaya te namah
"I offer my respectful obeisances to Jagannatha dasa Babaji Maharaja, who
is respected by the entire Vaishnava community and who discovered the place
where Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu appeared."
Shri Jagannatha Das Babaji Maharaja was born in the Mayamansingh

[p.94]
district of West Bengal. Gaudiya Vedanta-acharya Shri Baladev Vidyabhushan
had a disciple named Uddhava das. His disciple was Shri Madhusudana Das
Babaji who lived in Suryakunda. Madhusudan Das Babaji's disciple was
Jagannatha Das Babaji Maharaja.
Jagannatha Dasa Babaji lived in Vrindavan and performed his bhajan there
for quite some time. He became famous among the devotees there as one who was
perfect in Krishna-bhakti. In 1880, Shrimad Bhaktivinoda Thakura went to
Vrindavan and saw his lotus feet for the first time. While there, he received many
divine instructions on Hari-bhakti from Jagannatha Dasa. Some time later, Babaji
Maharaja visited the Barddhaman district during the month of Phalgun. He stayed
at a town called Amalajorha. At that time, Bhaktivinoda Thakura again had the
good fortune to take darshan of his holy feet.
Seeing Bhaktivinoda Thakur's enthusiasm for preaching the holy name of
Krishna, Shrila Babaji Maharaja was very happy. He stayed in Amalajorha during
ekadashi, and that night there was kirtan and Hari-katha. Later, at Amalajorha,
Shrila Bhaktivinoda Thakura established his Prappana-Ashram.
In 1893, Shrila Babaji Maharaja went from Koladwip (the part of
Nabadwipa where Shrila Shridhara Maharaja's temple is presently located) to
Surabhi-kunja in Godrumadwipa. There he took his seat. His arrival in Surabhikunja was a wonderful event. Shri Jagannatha Das Babaji revealed many lost holy
places in Mayapura, including the Yogapith, Shrivasa Angana, and others. It is
said that when he came upon the holy place of Mahaprabhu's birth he danced,
although he was very old and walked with difficulty. For some time he remained
in Nadia and performed his bhajan on the banks of the Ganges. His bhajan kutir
and samadhi mandir are still there at present. He ordered Bhaktivinoda Thakura to
build a hut so devotees could stay near his bhajan kutir, and Bhaktivinoda did so.
When Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura was twelve years old, he
was an expert in the Jyoti-shastras explaining Vedic astrology. Hearing this,
Shrila Babaji Maharaja one day called upon him to prepare the Vaishnava calendar
in accordance with the proper siddhanta. He did so and Babaji Maharaja was very

[p.95]
pleased. With this, the Nabadwipa Panjika, the Vaisnava calendar recording the
dates of the appearance and disappearance of important Vaishnava saints and the
celebration of important festivals, began.
Shrila Babaji Maharaja always had great enthusiasm for kirtan and
Vaishnava seva. Even when he was nearly 135 years old, he went on preaching the
message of Shri Chaitanya throughout the world for the benefit of the fallen
masses. In his old age, although he was almost paralyzed by infirmity, whenever it
was time for kirtana he would still raise his arms in ecstasy.
Jagannatha Dasa Babaji Maharaja was the vesa or Babaji guru of Bhagavat
dasa Babaji Maharaja. Bhagavta dasa in turn gave the dress of a babaji
Gaurakisora dasa Babaji. Jagannatha dasa Babaji’s servant's name was Bihari
dasa. He was extremely strong and powerful. In his old age, Babaji Maharaja
could not walk. Bihari dasa used to carry him in a basket on his shoulders so that
Babaji Maharaja could move from place to place. When he went to Calcutta,
Babaji Maharaja would stay at the house of Bhaktivinoda Thakura on Manikatala
Street. Bhaktivinoda was always very eager to invite him to his house for prasada,
but Babaji Maharaja was very renounced and would come only occasionally.
When he was in his old age, Babaji Maharaja was nearly blind. Many
people would come to see him and to offer him donations for the service of Sri
Krsna. His servant Bihari dasa would keep all these donations in a bag. One day,
Babaji Maharaja said, “Bihari ! How many rupees have I got?” Bihari dasa had
put some rupees aside for some service he had planned to render Babaji Maharaja.
When asked by Jagannatha dasa Babaji about how many rupees were on hand,
Bihari placed some rupees in his hand and kept twelve Rupees aside. Even though
his eyesight was failing, however, Babaji Maharaja detected the discrepancy.
“Bihari!” he said, “Why have you kept twelve Rupees aside? Give me all the
rupees!” Smiling at this fun, Bihari surrendered the remaining coins to his guru. At
that time, Babaji Maharaja made his wishes known as to how the money should be
spent. The total came to two hundred rupees. Babaji Maharaja ordered Birari dasa
to take the money at once and buy sweetballs, rasagolas, to feed the all the cows in
Nabadwipa dhama.

[p.96]
Once Babaji Maharaja was on the banks of the Ganges, living under a
makeshift canvas tent. Nearby that place there lived a dog with five puppies.
Whenever Babaji Maharaja would take prasada, the dogs would come around and
lick the food from his plate. When Bihari dasa caught hold of one of the dogs to
drive it off, Babaji Maharaja told him: “Bihari! If you wish to drive these dogs off,
you may take my plate away as well. I shall not eat today.” When Bihari
complained, “But guru maharaja—these dogs are unclean!” Babaji Maharaja
remarked, “No. These dogs are residents of the holy dhama. You may not abuse
them.”
Many people used to come and beg alms from Jagannatha dasa Babaji. He
did not want to give them alms, but told them to do service. One day a man named
Sri Gaura Hari dasa came and asked Jagannatha dasa Babaji Maharaja for alms,
but Babaji Maharaja would give him nothing. When the man persisted for three
days, fasting outside Babaji Maharaja’s tent, Babaji Maharaja finally relented. He
tore off a piece of his kaupina, his undergarment and gave it to Bihari dasa, his
servant, with the instruction to present it to the beggar as alms, thereby informing
the beggar that he must first learn to control his senses before taking up the
profession of a saint.
One day, Sri Babaji Maharaja remarked about the professional readers of
Srimad-Bhagavatam, “This kind of professional Bhagavata kirtana is simply
prostitution. Those who make their living by reading Srimad-Bhagavatam are
offenders to the holy name of Krsna. No one should listen to the kirtana and
Bhagavatam readings that they produce. And one who listens to such offensive
readings and thus commits offenses against the holy name of Krsna certainly go to
hell. Those who are involved in this professional reading should immediately give
it up. Such a person should worship the residents of Vrndavana with great care and
attention, considering himself most fallen, and thus pray for forgiveness.”
Srimad Bhaktivinoda Thakura remarked of Srila Jagannatha dasa Babaji
Maharaja that he was the topmost general among Gaudiya Vaisnavas.

[p.97]
Shri Jahnava Mata

Shri Suryadasa Sarakhela lived in Shaligrama. He had five brothers:
Damodara, Jagannatha, Gauridasa, Krishna dasa, and Nrishinga Chaitanya. His
fathers name was Shri Kamsari Mishra and his mother's name was Shri Kamala
Devi. Surya dasa used to be the King's treasurer, and it was in this connection that
he was given the title "Sarakhela."
Shri Suryadasa Sarakhela had two daughters. The older of the two was
named Shri Vasudha and the younger was named Shri Jahnava. The GauraGanodesha-dipika says: shri varuni revatyoramshasambhave, tasya priye
shrivasudha cha jahnava, shri suryadasakhya-mahatmanah sute, kakudmirupasya
cha suryatejasah, kecit shri vasudha-devim, kalav api vivrinute, ananga-manjarim
kecij, jahnavim ca pracakshate, ubhayam tu smichinam, purva-nyayat satam
matam. Kavi Karnapura says, "Shri Nityananda Prabhu's dear consorts, Shri
Vasudha and Jahnava Devi are expansions of Varuni and Revati, respectively. Shri
Suryadasa Pandit had formerly been Maharaja Kukudmi. His bodily effulgence
was as brilliant as the sun. Some say that Shrimati Vasudha-devi is the incarnation
of Shrimati Ananga-manjari, and others say that Shrimati Jahnavi-devi is the
incarnation of Shrimati Ananga-manjari. In truth, both opinions are correct. They
are both incarnations of Shrimati Ananga-manjari.
Suryadas Sarakhela was a dear devotee of Nityananda and Gauranga.
Seeing his daughters maturing into the full bloom of their youth, he began to think
about the subject of their marriage. This is recorded in Bhakti-Ratnakara:
"Suryadasa Pandit began to think about this very deeply. Once, thinking in this
way late at night, he fell asleep. At that time, a dream came to him. With this, his
mind was filled with bliss. In his dream, he saw himself giving his two daughters
in marriage to Shri Nityananda Prabhu.
Seeing this wonderful dream, the pandit swam in the ocean of ecstasy. A
little while later, his dream broke. The next morning, he told a brahmana friend of

[p.98]
his about his dream. He said, "I saw that Nityananda Prabhu is Balaram Himself.
His unprecedented bodily effulgence filled the ten directions with its radiance. His
arms and legs were decorated with all manner of wondrous and beautiful
ornaments. My two daughters accompanied him on either side of him, and,
having assumed the forms of Revati and Varuni, they were exceedingly beautiful.
Certainly I must offer the hands of my daughters to Shri Nityananda Prabhu in
marriage. Until he accepts them, I shall never find peace."
In this way, having informed his brahmana friend of his intentions,
Sarakhela Pandit dispatched him to Nabadwipa, to Shrivasa Pandita. With great
haste the brahmana left, and soon he arrived at the house of Shrivasa. At that time,
Nityananda Prabhu was staying at the house of Shrivasa Pandita. The brahmana
explained to Shrivasa how Suryadas Sarakhela wanted to offer his two daughters
in marriage to Nityananda Prabhu. Upon hearing all this, Shrivasa became happy,
and submitted the entire matter to Shri Nityananda Prabhu. The merciful
Nityanandna Prabhu told the brahmana to return to Suryadas Sarakhela with the
assurance that he would certainly fulfill his heart's desire. When the news came to
Advaita Acharya, he became extremely happy. He said, "May all this take place
very soon." Meanwhile, the brahmana returned to Shaligrama and gave the
auspicious news to Suryadas Sarakhela. Upon hearing this, Suryadas's ecstasy
knew no bounds.
In Borogacchi grama lived the son of King Harihora, Shri Krishnadasa. He
was a great and dear devotee of Shri Nityananda Prabhu. He was prepared to bear
and make all the necessary arrangements for a lavish wedding, putting his own
home at the disposal of the entire celebration. Wanting Lord Nityananda to accept
this as his offering, Krishna dasa went quickly to Nityananda Prabhu, and prayed
that he might be allowed to bring the Lord to Borogacchi gram and commence
with the wedding there.
Shrivasa, Shri Advaita Acharya, Shri Chandrashekhara, Murari Gupta as
well as all the other devotees of Shri Gaurasundara gathered there and began
performing sankirtana. Shri Surya Dasa Sarakhela's brother, Krishnadasa, quickly
returned to Borogacchi Gram. Nityananda Prabhu also arrived there shortly, as did

[p.99]
all the devotees from Shaligrama. Seeing Nityananda Prabhu and all the different
devotees who had arrived, Suryadas Sarakhela ran out on the road before them in
great ecstasy and, welcoming them, invited them to his own home, after falling
before the lotus feet of Shri Nityananda Prabhu in humble submission. The BhaktiRatnakara records this as follows: "Falling at the lotus feet of Shri Nityananda
Prabhu Suryadasa flooded the ground with his tears. With his two hands he tightly
held the lotus feet of Nityananda Prabhu. His voice trembling, he wanted to speak,
but could find no words. Nityananda Prabhu slowly began to smile, and gradually
was unable to contain his ecstatic laughter. Bestowing his full mercy upon
Suryadasa, he embraced him. Suryadasa became absorbed in bliss. Who could
have understood the limits of his ecstasy? Seeing his brother, Gauridasa also
became ecstatic; not being able to contain his patience, was overwhelmed with
internal delight.
A little while later, Shri Suryadasa Pandita worship the lotus feet of
Nityananda Prabhu and offered his two daughters—Shri Vasudha and Shri
Jahnava Mata—into the hands of Nityananda. The Bhakti Ratnakara says, "In the
opinion of both the scriptures and the people in general Suryadasa was most
fortunate, having given his daughters in charity to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Lord Nityananda Prabhu.
Thereafter, following the beautiful and auspicious wedding, Shri
Nityananda Prabhu remained in Shaligrama Pura for some time. In time, he went
to Nabadwipa dhama, and arrived at the house of Sachidevi with his two wives.
He offered his obeisances to the lotus feet of Shri Sachidevi. Sachimata was
delighted to see Vasudha and Jahnava. She embraced them again and again, sat
them on her lap and affectionately pinched them on the cheek.
All the Vaishnava housewives in Nabadwipa showed great affection
toward the two brides of Nityananda. On the order of Sachidevi, Nityananda went
to the house of Advaita Acharya in Shantipura. When Sita Thakurani saw
Vasudha and Shri Jahnava, she floated inthe waves of ecstasy. She also embraced
them as affectionately as Sachidevi had. Shri Nityananda stayed there at the house
of Advaita for some time, until Uddharana Datta Thakura requested him to come

[p.100]
to stay at his place in Saptagrama. There he stayed for a few days, and, after taking
part in a great sankirtan festival, went on to Boro Grama. Nityananda Prabhu
performed endless kirtan pastimes and wandered from one place to the next for
this purpose.
After some time, Shri Vasudhadevi gave birth to a daughter named Ganga
and a son named Virachandra. Shri Jahnavadevi, on the other hand, had no
children.
After Shri Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acharya, Shrivasa Pandita, and
many other members of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's personal entourage had
gone back to Godhead, Shri Jahnava Mata wanted to further inundate the world
with a flood of sankirtan nectar. At that time, in Kheturi Gram, on the Phalguna
Purnima day, the day of Mahaprabhu's advent, a great festival was to be held. The
three acharyas Narottama, Shyamananda, and Shrinivasa (the three-fold mercypotency of the Lord) heard that a great festival was to be held in Kheturi Gram at
the house of Raja Santosha Datta. They too arrived to take part.
The festival had been arranged by King Santosh Dutta. He was the son of
Narottam's brother as well as Narottam's disciple. For this festival, Jahanava Devi
herself, the wife of Lord Nityananda, had come. Along with her came her uncle,
Shri Krishna Mishra, as well as Shirpati, Shrinidhi, Minaketana Ramadasa, Murari
Chaitanya, Jnana dasa, Parameshvari dasa, Balarama Dasa, Vrindavan Das
Thakura, and all the other dearmost followers of Shri Nityananda Prabhu.
Jahanava Mata first went to the house of Gauridasa Pandit in Ambika Kalna along
with all her followers. The disciple of Gauri das Pandita, Hridaya Chaitanya with
great cordiality welcomed Shri Jahnava Mata and all the devotees. Shri Jahnava
Mata with her own hand cooked the offering for the Gaura-Nityananda deities
there. Having had a festival there for one night, they went on to Nabadwipa.
Arriving at the house of Mahaprabhu, and not seeing Sachimata there, Shri
Jahanva Mata was very unhappy to have missed her, and felt the pangs of
separation. Shripati and Shrinidhi then took Shri Jahnava Mata to their own
Nabadwip home. Not seeing Shrivasa Pandita and Malinidevi there, she was
heartbroken and began to cry. They stayed the night there, and on the following

[p.101]
day went to Shantipura. Finding that Shri Advaita Acharya and Shri Sita
Thakurani had passed away, Jahnava Mata was filled with grief. Their sons,
Achyutananda and Gopala cordially greeted Jahnava Mata and all her Vaishnava
associates and welcomed them with a proper ceremonial reception.
At length, Shri Jahnava Mata, along with her devotee associates went on to
a place in Kanthak Nagara known as Teliyabudhir Gram, where the brother of
Ramchandra Kaviraja, whose name was Govinda Kaviraja, greeted Her with all
respect and offered puja to her. After staying there one night, they all set out for
Kheturi Grama.
Arriving on the other side of the river from Kheturi Grama, they found that
Raja Santosha Datta had made arrangements for boats to ferry the devotees across
the river Padma as well as other conveyances to bring the devotees into Kheturi
Gram. He also made many other arrangements for the well-being of the devotees,
including suitable housing and ample prasada. Everything was decorated very
beautifully. Raja Santosha Datta personally came a long way down the road just to
welcome Jahanava Mata and her company by offering them flowers and garlands,
as well as many other gifts.
In this way, all the devotees headed by Jahnava Mata entered Kheturi
Gram while performing Sankirtana. At this time, with Shrinivasa, Narottama, and
Shyamananda in front welcomed the delegation of devotees headed by Jahnava
Mata by offering their full obeisances with great humility in the dust of the road.
The devotees embraced each other in great ecstasy, and gradually they filled the
four directions with the ecstatic and tumultuous sound of their kirtan.
Raja Santosha Datta had caused beautiful houses to be constructed to
house the devotees headed by Jahnava Mata. He also made arrangements for
servants to care for their every need. Gradually the different devotees headed by
Jahanva retired to their respective quarters, and after having honored prasada, they
rested. Seeing that the service of the Vaishnavas had been properly taken care of,
Raja Santosha Datta was very happy.
The following day was the appearance day of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

[p.102]
Within the newly constructed mandir, six deities were to be installed. In the
evening, the devotees began performing sankirtana. Shri Raghunandana, from Shri
Khanda, began the preliminary kirtan. All the people of Kheturi gram turned out
for the occasion. Within the midst of that great assembly, Nityananda's shakti, Shri
Jahanva Mata looked very beautiful. Upon seeing her, upon seeing the devotees
gathered there, and upon hearing the divine kirtan of those great souls, all the
atheists and sinners were supremely purified. Everyone had left their homes and
hurried out to see the devotees and to drown themselves in the nectar of the
kirtan. Everyone dived and surfaced in the ocean of ecstasy, and in this way were
drowned in the bliss of Vaikuntha. In this way, the kirtan continued until
midnight.
The following day, with great pomp, and before a huge crowd, Shrinivas
Acharya himself performed the abhishek ceremony for the installation of the six
deities. On the order of Jahnava Mata and the devotees, Narottama Thakura began
to perform kirtan. In the midst of that kirtan, Shri Gauranga Mahaprabhu Himself,
accompanied Nityananda Prabhu and all his eternal associates, made his divine
appearance. Who can describe the overflowing of ecstasy felt by the assembled
devotees there in Kheturi Grama on that day? Those who could remember that
festival all attained eternal fame.
On the third day of the festival, Jahanva Mata herself cooked the bhoga for
the deities. "Shri Jahnava Devi was extremely delighted by the Sankirtan festival.
After purifying herself by bathing in the Ganges at midday, with great
enthusiasm, she cooked wonderful preparations of rice, vegetables and other
things. Her cooking was unprecedented." (BR 10th Taranga).
Shri Jahnava Mata herself distributed prasada by her own hand to the great
souls present there at that grand festival. After the festival was over, Jahnava Mata
left Kheturi Gram accompanied by her entourage of devotees, and set out for
Vrindvana. On the way there, they passed through Prayaga and Kashi and arrived
in Mathura. There they visited Krishna's holy birthplace, and, after bathing at
Vishrama Ghata, they entered Vrindavana. In order to welcome Shri Jahanva
Mata, some of the Vrindvana devotees met her in Mathura. Shri Parameshvari Das

[p.103]
describes this meeting, and mentions the names of the different devotees who
turned out to meet her, as follows:
"There was Gopal Bhatta Goswami, a reservoir of gaur-prema, and
Bhugarbha Goswami, as well as the highly qualified Lokanatha. Krishna dasa
brahmachari and Shri Krishna Pandita, Shri Madhu Pandit and the celebrated Shri
Jiva were also present there. All of them were introduced to Jahnava Mata, who
was informed of their names by Jiva Goswami. Hearing all this, Jahnava Mata's
great ecstasy was increased." (Bhakti Ratnakara)
Having approached Shri Jahnava Mata, all the goswamis present there fell
before her lotus feet and offered their pranams, and she allso offered her pranams
to them. Shri Jahnava Mata, seeing the ecstatic efforts of the Goswamis was very
happy. At last she toured the holy places in Vrindavana and saw the different
deities of Vrindavana, headed by Shri Govinda, Shri Gopinatha, and Shri Madana
Mohana. The Goswamis had made an extensive effort to see to it that the
arrangements for Jahnava Mata's stay were topmost. After some days in
Vrindavana, she went to see Govardhan hill, Radha-kunda and Shyamakunda.
When she visited the different places of the Lord's pastimes, different divine
moods amd emotions connected with those pastimes awakened within her. In this
way, after wandering about in Vrindavana for some time, she returned to
Gaudadesha, Bengal.
Having reached Gaudamandala, the greater circle of Mahaprabhu's
pastimes in Bengal, She first went to Kheturi Gram. There, the devotees came out
to greet and welcome her, led by Narottama and Ramchandra Kaviraja. After
staying there a few days, she went on to Budhari Gram. In Budhari Grama lived
ther brother of Vamshidasa, Shri Shyamadasa Chakravarti. She proposed that his
daughter Shri Hemalata should be married to Boro Gangadasa. On her order,
Shyamadasa gave his daughter to Boro Gangadasa. After the wedding, Jahnava
Mata gave Gangadasa the responsibilty of worshiping the deity of
Shyamasundara. After staying in Badhuri Gram for some time, Jahnava Mata
went to see the birthplace of Shri Nityananda Prabhu in the village of Ekachakra.
As she took darshan there, she heard about the father and mother of Shri

[p.104]
Nityananda, Harai Pandit and Padmavati. Hearing about her father-in-law and
mother-in-law, and meditating upon them, She was overwhelmed with separation
and began to weep. In the company of a local brahman, she saw the different
places of Nityananda Prabhu's childhood pastimes. No one can describe the bliss
she felt upon seeing those places. That day she stayed at the empty house which
had once been occupied by Nityananda's parents, which had once been
Nityananda's home. She passed the night chanting the names of the Lord in kirtan.
Having stayed for one night in Ekachakra, she went to Kanthak Nagara,
near Katwa. She say the place of the Lord's sannyasa, and wept. From there, she
went to Yajigram, to the house of Shrinivasa Thakura. The devotees there, headed
by Shrinivasa Acharya, welcomed her with great devotion. Shrinivasa invited her
into his home and performed a puja in honor of Jahnava Mata, worshiping her. In
this way, that best of Acharyas, Shrinivasa, absorbed himself in the service of
Jahnava Mata. After staying in Yajigram for some days, she again returned to
Nabadwipa, to the birthplace of Shriman Mahaprabhu. At that time, Ishan, the
family servant of Mahaprabhu was in his ripe old age. Upon entering the house of
Mahaprabhu, Jahanva Mata fainted in ecstasy. Seeing her absorbed in a divine
trance of ecstasy, the devotees also became ecstatic and began to weep tears of
prem. Fromt he house of Mahaprabhu, She went to the courtyard of Shrivasa,
where she spent the night. And all night, in the coutryard of Shrivasa, the
devotees engaged in mahasankirtana, dancing and chanting with great enthusiasm,
for the courtyard of Shrivasa is where Mahaprabhu began his sankirtan pastimes.
That night, Jahanva Mata had a dream in which she saw Shri Gaurasundara and
his devotees performing different pastimes.
The following day, She offered her prayers again and again to the holy
dham of Nabadwipa, and then turned towards Ambika Kalna and set out in that
direction. At again being visited by Shri Jahnava Mata, the residents of Ambika
Kalna were overjoyed. Remembering Gauridasa Pandita, who had since passed
away, Shri Jahnava Mata wept again and again. She offered her prayers there, at
the lotus feet of the Shri Gaura and Nityananda deities. There the devotees began
a kirtan, and in the midst of that great and tumultuous kirtan, Gaura and
Nityananda personally appeared. That night, Jahnava Mata, as she had done

[p.105]
previously, cooked many preparations for the pleasure of Gaura-Nityananda and
offered it them upon the altar. Later, she herself distributed that prasada to the
devotees there. That night, as she slept, in her dreams she saw Gauridasa Pandita
with Gaura and Nityananda. They all offered Jahnava Mata their blessings.
The following day, bidding farewell to the devotees, Jahanva Mata went to
the home of Uddharana Datta Thakura. There, after staying for a one-night
sankirtan festival, she got in a boat and returned to her own home in Khorodoha
Gram. In Khoradoha Gram, upon seeing her once again, the devotees felt
boundless joy. With great eagerness everyone tried to push in front of the crowd
to catch a glimpse of her. The devotees greeted her with sankirtan. Nityananda's
son, Birchandra and his daughter Shri Ganga offered their prayers at the lotus feet
of Shri Jahnava Mata, and in turn were affectionately embraced by her. She
smelled their heads in affection. After this, Jahnava Mata and Shri Vasudha devi,
offered their respects to each other. After this, Shri Jahnava Mata spoke of her
visit to the different holy places in Gaura Mandala and Vraja Mandala with all the
devotees. Shri Jahnava Mata retained Parameshvari Thakura as a servant. The
two of them were unlimitedly happy to see one another once again. The other
devotees bid their farewells.
The story of Shri Jahnava Mata's pilgrimage throughout the holy places of
Gaura Mandala and Vraja Mandala has become quite famous throughout the
society of Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Shri Jahnava Mata is a reservoir of prema-bhakti
and is known as Nityananda-svarupini—the other self of Nityananda Prabhu. She
delivered many sinners and atheists by her mercy. Her divine opulence
(aishavarya) and sweetness (madhurya) are both astounding.
The birthday of Shri Jahnava Mata, the shakti of Nityananda, is celebrated
on the 8th day of the full moon in the month of Vaishakha.
Shrila Bhaktivinoda Thakura, in his Kalyana Kalpataru has prayed as
follows at the lotus feet of Shri Jahnava Mata:
"Having fallen into this ocean of misery, my life is a bewilderment, and I do not
know how to reach its shore, nor even where to search for it. All my efforts

[p.106]
(karma) are useless, all my knowledge (jnana) is useless, as are mysticism (yoga),
austerity, religious penance, and mundane piety. None of these processes have any
power to rescue me. I am weak, helpless. I don't know how to swim across this
ocean of ignorance. Who will deliver me from this dangerous predicament?
Within this dangerous ocean of material existence I see the crocodiles of sense
gratification—what a terrible sight! Within this ocean, I am tossed about by the
turbulent waves which constantly boil and churn like a ship without a rudder. The
impulses and urges that I have acquired from my previous births are like a wind
that blows the ship in all directions. My mind is unsteady. This ship has no
captain, no direction. I weep in despair, seeing that I cannot cross this ocean of
misery. O Jahnava Devi! Today, by the power of your divine qualities, be
merciful to this servant of yours. Dispell this illusion which torments me, and
relieve me of the anguish of material existence. Let me take shelter at your lotus
feet, for in this way I shall certainly cross over the ocean of birth and death. You
are Nityananda-shakti—the divine energy of Nityananda Himself. You are the
guru of Krishna-bhakti. Be merciful to me and grant me the shade of your holy
lotus feet, which are like a wish-fulfilling tree. You have delivered countless
abominable sinners. Please deliver me in the same way. Today, this lowly sinner
falls at your holy feet, praying for your mercy."

Jayadeva Goswami

Shri Jayadeva Goswami was the court pandit of Shri Lakshman Sena, the
King of Bengal. Jayadeva's father was Bhojadev, and his mother's name was
Bamadevi. They lived in the Birbhum district of what is now West Bengal in a
village called Kenubilva Gram. He was born at the beginning of the twelfth
centrury AD.
Jayadeva Goswami's wife was named Shri Padmavati. When he was the
court pandit of Laksman Sen, he lived on the banks of the Ganges. Approximately
three hundred years before the appearance of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Shri

[p.107]
Jayadeva Goswami lived in Bengal. He was the author of Shri Gita Govinda,
which is mentioned by Krishnadas Kaviraja Goswami in the Chaitanya
Charitamrita as follows (CC ML 2/11): "Day and night, in teh company of
Svarupa Damodara and Ramananda Raya, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu used to
hear with great ecstasy the songs of Vidyapati and Chandidas, as well as a drama
composed by Ramananda Raya. He also used to relish hearing the KrishnaKarnamrita and the Gita-Govinda. In his introduction, Jayadeva says that the Gita
Govinda is a scripture describing the intimate pastimes of Shri Radha and
Govinda. It may be worshiped and served by those who are extremely qualified in
devotional piety. For those who are constantly remembering the rasik pastimes of
Shri Hari within his mind, Shri Jayadeva has composed this divine poetic song
glorifying the Lord's internal pastimes. He requests the topmost spiritually
advanced souls to hear it with gravity and attention.
There are many many traditional stories regarding the life of Shri
Jayadeva. The following story is generally accepted as authoritative. One day,
Shri Jayadeva Goswami was composing a particulary sensitive section of the GitaGovinda, describing Krishna's relationship with the gopis headed by Radharani.
He meditated deeply on what he had written and became concerned that he had
perhaps gone too far in describing the exalted character of the gopis. What he had
written seemed to represent Krishna's position as being, in a sense, subordinate to
that of the gopis. And yet Krishna is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. How
could he be subordinate to the gopis? He had been inspired to pen a line stating
that Krishna bows down to touch the lotus feet of Shri Radha. But his hand
shrank from the page. He hesitated thinking, "How can I commit such an idea to
writing? How can I have the audacity to put such a thing it in black and white?"
At that time he decided to go bathe in the Ganges, in hopes that perhaps some
inspiration would come to him.
Jayadeva Goswami went off to take his afternoon bath, leaving his wife
Padmavati behind to cook the offering for the Deities. While he was away,
Krishna arrived at his house in the dress of Jayadeva. Krishna went over to
Jayadeva's writing desk, and there found the sheaves of palm upon which the GitaGovinda was written. Krishna picked up Jayadeva's pen and wrote the verse with

[p.108]
the line "dehi padapallava-mudaram," wherein it says "Krishna bows down his
head to the lotus feet of Shri Radha." With this Krishna, disguised as Jayadeva, sat
down and took the prasadam prepared by Padmavati. After finishing his
prasadam, Krishna stepped outside and vanished. Just at that time, Jayadeva
returned from bathing at the Ganges. When he asked about prasadam, his wife was
perplexed. When she told Jayadeva what had just happened, Jayadeva was
astonished. He was he went over to his book and saw there in wet ink the verse he
had thought of writing before he had gone to bathe in the Ganges: dehi
padapallavam udaram: Krishna bows down his head to the lotus feet of Shri
Radha. Upon seeing that verse he said to Padmavati, "It is a miracle! See here:
what I told you I was reluctant to write has been written here exactly as I thought
of it." Tears of ecstasy flowed in rivers from his eyes as he understood the
mystery of what had just transpired. "Padmavati!" he said, "You are most
fortunate. Krishna Himself has written the line, dehi padapallavam udaram, and
accepted prasadam from your own hand."
Shrila Bhaktivinoda Thakura has written that although Chandidasa,
Vidyapati, Bilvamangala, and Jayadeva lived before Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
was externally manifest within this world, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's conception of
bhakti had arisen within their hearts and was expresed in their writings. Besides
the Gita Govinda, Jayadeva Gowsami has written another book called
Chandraloka.
The famous Dasa-Avatara-Gita, describing the ten avatars of Vishnu is
from Gita-Govinda. Jayadeva Goswami's disappearance day is on PaushaSankranti. At present, at Jayadeva's birthplace in Kendubiva Gram, there is a
festival every year on this day which is known as the Jayadeva Mela;.

Kaliya Krishna Dasa Thakura

Kaviraja Goswami writes (CC Adi 11.37) that Kaliya Krishna Dasa was
one of the principle devotees of Nityananda Prabhu. He knew nothing other than

[p.109]
the lotus feet of Shri Nityananda Prabhu. According to Kavi Karnapura's GauraGanodeshs Dipika, He was one of the 12 gopals in Vrindavana, and in the
pastimes of Krishna in Vrindavana was known as Labhanga, one of Krishna's
cowherd boy friends.
His birthplace is in the Bardhaman (Burdwan) district of West Bengal
within a short distance from the Railway station at Katwa, at the village called
Akai Hatta. This village is situated on the old king's road between Nabadwipa and
Katwa. Akai Hatta is a very small village. On the twelfth day of the dark moon in
the month of Caitra, Shri Kaliya Krishna Dasa Thakura disappeared. This is not
the same Kala Krishna dasa who accompanied Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to
South India. At present, Kala Krishnadas's descendents live in different holy
places in Bengal.

Lives of the Saints
Kashishwara Pandit Goswami

Sri Kasisvara Pandita was a disciple of Sri ^svara Puri. His father’s name
was Sri Vasudeva Bhattacarya. He was from section of family brahmanas coming
from the dynasty of Kanjilal Kanu. His last name was Chaudhuri. Sri
Bhaktivedanta Swami writes: “His nephew, his sister’s son, who was named
Rudra Pandita, was the original priest of Vallabhapura, whic his situated about one
mile from the Srirampura railway station in the village of Catara. Installed there
are the Deities of Radha-Govinda and Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Kasisvara Gosani

[p.110]
was a very strong man, and therfore when Lord Caitanya visited the temple of
Jagannatha, he used to protect the Lord from the crowds. Another of his duties was
to distribute prasada to the devotees after the kirtana. He was also one of the
contemporaries of the Lord who was with the Lord in Jagannatha Puri. Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati also visited this temple at Vallabhapura. At that time,
the person in charge was a Saivite, Sri Sivacandra Caudhuri, who was a
descendant of Kasisvara Gosani’s brother. In Vallabhapura there was a permanent
arrangement to cook nine kilos of rice, vegetables and other foodstuffs, and near
the village there is sufficient land, which belongs to the Deity, on which this rice
was grown....It is said in the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika that the servant of Krsna in
Vrndavana named Bhrngara descended as sasisvara Gosani during the pastimes of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. ^n our householder life we also sometimes visited
this temple of Vallabhapura and took prasada there at noon. The Deities of this
temple, Sri Sri Radha-Govinda and the Gauranga vigraha, are extremely beautiful.
Near Vallabhapura is another beautiful temple of Jagannatha. We sometimes used
to take prasada in this temple also. These two temples are situated within a onemile radius of the Srirampura railway station near Calcutta.”
Caitanya-Caritamrta records: “Brahmacari Kasisvara and Sri Govinda were
dear disciples of Sri ^svara Puri. When ^svara Puri passed into the eternal lila of
the Lord and thus attained perfection, the two of them went to Jagannatha Puri to
serve Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu on his order. Since both Kasisvara and Govinda
were his godbrothers, the Lord honored them as his peers. Only after considering
the orders of ^svara Puri did he accept them as his personal servants, having been

[p.111]
instructed to do so by his guru. Sri Govinda attended Mahaprabhu personally as
his servant, whereas Kasisvara was engaged as a bodyguard to protect the Lord
from the crowds when he visited the temple of Jagannatha. Thus he would walk in
front of the Lord. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to the temple of Jagannatha,
Kasisvara, being very strong, cleared the crowds aside with his hands so that
Caitanya Mahaprabhu could pass untouched.”
Sri Kasisvara Pandita was extremely strong. Sri Kavikarnapura Goswami
writes: “Kasisvara Pandita and Sri Govinda were formerly those servants of Krsna
in Vraja named Bhrngara and Bhangura who used to bear water from the Yamuna
for Krsna.” Kasisvara Pandita spent much time in Puri-dhama in the service of Sri
Caitanya. He used to serve prasada to the devotees after the kirtanas.
Kasisvara Pandita had a disciple named Sri Govinda Gosani who was a
great servant of the Sri Govinda Deity. When Sri Rupa Goswami was in
Vrndavana, he established the service of the Govinda Deity. Upon hearing this,
Caitanya Mahaprabhu was highly pleased. He quickly sent Kasisvara Pandita to
Vrndavana to assist Rupa Goswami. But Kasisvara Pandita did not want to give up
the association of the Lord in Puri. Sri Caitanya, as the Paramatma, the Supersoul
living in everyone’s heart, could understand the mind of his devotee. He gave him
a deity which was identical with his very self. Kasisvara Pandita took that deity of
Caitanya Mahaprabhu with him, and by serving and feeding that deity, he was
solaced in his separation from Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this connection, Sri
Narahari Cakravarti Thakura remarks in his Bhakti-ratnakara as follows:
“Kasisvara Pandita told Caitanya Mahaprabhu, ‘I cannot bear to leave you

[p.112]
behind.’ The Lord understaood the heart of Kasisvara Pandita and gave him a
deity of Himself which was so carefully formed as to resemble the Lord exactly.
Seeing that deity of Caitanya Mahaprabhu eating all the offerings placed before
Him, Kasisvara Pandita experienced great ecstasy. Caitanya Mahaprabhu told him
to call the deity ‘Gaura-Govinda.’ Taking that deity with him, Kasisvara Pandita
went to Vrndavana. That deity sat to the left of the Sri Govinda deity and in this
way wonderful service was performed for the pleasure of the Sri Govinda deity.”
Kasisvara Pandita’s glories are innumerable and exalted. His
disappearance day is on the full moon day in the month of Asvin, on the festival
day which is also celebrated at the Maharasa dance of Radha-Govinda.

Shrila Lochan Dasa Thakura

Shrila Lochan Das Thakura took his birth in a family of brahmans who
lived in a village in the rada-desh, in Mahakumara, near Katwa, in the Burdhaman
district of Bengal. When he was only a little boy, he enjoyed the good fortune of
meeting the devotees of Shri Gauranga. His guru was Narahari Sarakara Thakura.
In his Chaitanya Mangala, Shrila Lochana Dasa Thakura has written: "My hope of
hopes is to be near the lotus feet of Shri Narahari Thakura, to serve and worship
him with my very life. The cherished desire of the fallen Locana Dasa is to be
allowed by the grace of Narahari to sing the glories of Shri Gauranga. My Lord is
Shri Narahari Thakura, and I am his servant. Bowing and praying before him I beg
him to allow me his service. This is my only aspiration."

[p.113]
Previously in Bengal the poets used to compose sacred songs and verses in
different forms of classic rhymes and rythmic meters called Panchali. The
Panchali style of composition was especially used for glorifying the Lord. Shrila
Lochana Dasa Thakura used the Panchali form of verse-meter in composing his
famous work, Shri Chaitanya Mangala. The Panchali form employs five different
kinds of song-styles.
Shri Lochana Das's father's name was Shri Kamalakara Dasa. His mother's
name was Shri Sadanandi. Lochan Dasa was his father's only son, and so was the
darling of his parents. He spent the better part of his years staying at the house of
his grandparents. and there began his studies and his education. At a very young
age, Shri Lochana Dasa was married. From early childhood, Shri Lochana Dasa
had great attachment for Shri Gauranga and at the same time great detachment
from material enjoyment. In the prime of his youth he went to Shri Khanda where
he found his gurudeva, Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakur, and took shelter at his lotus
feet. He stayed there for some time, and there he was instructed in kirtan.
The principle source material that was drawn upon by Shri Lochan Dasa
Thakura in composing his Chaitanya Mangala was a Sanskrit book by Murari
Gupta called Shri Chaitanya Charitamritam. Lochan Dasa Thakura explains this in
his Chaitanya Mangala as follows: "That very Murari Gupta who lived in Nadiya
composed many Sanskrit verses about the life of Shri Gauranga, which he later
arranged in the form of a book. Having heard these verses from Murari Gupta,
Damodara Pandit taught them to me, and I memorized them with great delight. As
these Sanskrit verses, and the conception of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu imparted to

[p.114]
me through Damodara Pandita developed within my mind, it flowed forth from me
in the form of these Panchali verses in Bengali, which I write in glorification of
the life and pastimes of Shri Chaitanya." (C.M. Sutra-Khanda) In his preface to the
Chaitanya Mangala, Shrila Lochana Dasa Thakura offers his prayers to Vrindavan
dasa Thakura before proceeding with the narrative. He says, "I offer my prayers of
submission to Vrindavana Dasa Thakura with all my heart. The sweet song of his
Chaitanya Bhagavata has enchanted the whole world." (C.M. Sutra-Khanda)
Vrindavan Dasa Thakura's Chaitanya Bhagavata was originally called
Chaitanya Mangala. It is said that Shrila Lochana Dasa Thakura and Shrila
Krishna Dasa Kaviraja Goswami gave it the name Chaitanya Bhagavata.
Krishnadasa Kavriaja Goswami writes: "krishna lila bhagavate kahe vedadvyasa,
chaitanya lilara vyasa—vrindavana dasa." Vedavyasa has described the pastimes
of Krishna in his Bhagavata. The Vyasa of Chaitanya Lila is Vrindavan Dasa."
From this comparison between Vedavyasa and Vrindavana Dasa, it has been
concluded that Kaviraja Goswami is probably responsible for Vrindavan Dasa
Thakur's work becoming known as the Bhagavata of Chaitanya Lila, or ChaitanyaBhagavata.
There are many pastimes of Shri Chaitanya that have only been touched on
briefly by Vrindvana Dasa Thakura. These are described in detail in the Chaitanya
Mangala of Lochana Dasa Thakura.
The Chaitanya Mangala is divided into four parts: Sutra Khanda, Adi
Khanda, Madhyama Khanda and Shesha Khanda. The Sutra Khanda has two
chapters, Adi Khanda has seven chapters, the Madhyama Khanda twelve, and the

[p.115]
Shesha Khanda three. The contents of the Adi Khanda are as follows.
The first chapter in the Sutra Khanda is called Mangalaracharanam, or
auspicious invocation. It begins with a song of the glories of Shri Chaitanya and
then praises the Vaishnavas who were personal associates of Shri Chaitanya.
After this, Lochan Dasa Thakura offers respects to his gurudeva, Narahari
Sarakara Thakura, and prays for his guru's mercy. He offers his obeisances at the
lotus feet of the countless devotees and personal associates of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, known and unknown. Having prayed for the blessings of guru and
vaishnavas, Lochan dasa explains that Murari Gupta had written a book in
Sanskrit called the Chaitanya Charitamritam, and that since that book is no longer
available, he is giving its essence in the form of Bengali verse called Panchali. He
then briefly describes the subjects found in the Adi, Madhya, and Shesha Khandas.
The second chapter of the Sutra Khanda is called Grantharambha, for here
the book actually begins. In this chapter Lochan Dasa relates how he heard from
Damodara Pandita the story of Jaimini's Mahabharata recital, wherein he describes
a conversation between Narada and Uddhava. In that conversation Narada
explained the cause of Krishna's appearance in the golden form of Shri Gauranga.
One time Narada saw that with the coming of the age of Kali the living
beings had fallen into great suffering. He began to worry about how they could be
delivered and the principles of dharma restored. Thinking in this way, he decided
that only Krishna's descent into this world would deliver the fallen souls and
restore the principles of religion. Wanting to appeal to Krishna to descend as an
avatara, he set out for Dwaraka dham. At that time, Krishna was staying in the

[p.116]
palace of Shri Rukmini devi.
Just then, upon learning that Shri Krishna would soon appear on earth in a
golden form, with the golden luster and devotional mood of Radharani,
Rukminidevi became deeply troubled. Feeling separation from the Lord, she fell at
the lotus feet of Krishna and began praising the qualities of Shri Radha—whose
devotion was so glorious that Krishna wanted to honor her by assuming her luster
and mood. At that time Narada entered the room. He explained to Krishna the
reason for his trip—that he wanted Krishna to descend to the earth planet in order
to deliver the fallen souls. At that time, Krishna revealed to him how in the future
he would appear as the son of Sachidevi and Jagannatha Mishra in Nabadwipa
dham: in a golden form with all his transcendental associates.
Having seen that golden form revealed, Narada was overwhelmed with
ecstasy. Constantly thinking of this golden form and the Lord's plans to appear in
Navadwipa dhama as Shri Gauranga, Narada the best of munis went to visit
Naimisharanya, all the while singing the glories of the Lord. There, in answer to
Uddhava's inquiries about the welfare of the living beings, he explained how in
Kali-yuga—the best of all ages because of Shri Gauranga's advent—Krishna
would appear in a golden form as Shri Gauranga and perform the kirtan of the
holy name of Hari. Narada told Uddhava how the Lord would come to establish
the Sankirtana of the holy name of Krishna as the yuga-dharma, the religious
principle for the age of Kali. Narada explained the glories of kirtana.
Thereafter, Narada Muni related to Uddhava the discussion that had
previously taken place when he had gone to Kailasa and visited Lord Shiva, the

[p.117]
best of Vaishnavas. There, Narada and Parvati discussed the glories of
Mahaprasada, having heard of the glroies of Mahaprasada from Narada, Parvati
had performed 12 years of Lakshmi-seva. By her mercy, Parvait got some of
Laksmidevi's own mahaprasada. and also gave shiva a small bit of that prasada.
Not able to tolerate the dancing of Lord Shiva upon obtaining this Mahaprasada,
the earth came before Parvati, begging her to give the Mahaprasada of the
Vaishanvas to all the jivas. With this proposal, Parvati explained how the Gauraavatara would come in kaliyuga and distribute Mahaprasada to all the fallen souls.
After this, Narada went to Brahma and discussed the Gaura-avatara with
him. Brahma, the creator, at that time explained to him the essential subject of the
Shrimad Bhagavatam, and showed him how the version of the Bhagavatam
supported the gaura-avatara. After this, Narada began wandering here and there.
As he went form place to place he became concerned about he sufferings of the
jivas. As he was worrying about the living entities in this way, he came near
Jagannatha Puri. There he heard a divine voice disccussing the avatara of
Jagannatha. On the order of the divine voice he went to Puri. From there, the Lord
ordered him to go to Goloka. First he came to Vaikuntha. After this, he arrived in
Goloka, where he saw many pastimes of the Lord. There he saw the Lord in his
golden form as Shri Gaura, and fainted in ecstasy. After this, he went all over the
universe, informing all the gods of the news.
In Shwetadwipa he saw the supernatural pastimes of Balarama, the very
figure of service. After this, all the demigods began taking birth on earth. As
previously mentioned by Krishna in his conversation with Rukmini, the Lord,

[p.118]
along with Satyabhama, Rukmini, and all his eternal associates from the spiritual
world came with the luster and mood of Radharani in a golden form as Shri
Gauranga. He came to spead the sankirtan of the holy name of Krishna. Balarama
came as Nityananda, Shiva came as Advaita Prabhu, and other great souls
descended as his other eternal associates like Murari, Mukunda, Shrivasa, Raya
Ramananda, Ishvara Puri, and Madhavendra Puri. Lochan Dasa Thakur concludes
the chapter by praising the glories of his guru, Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura,
and his nephew Raghunandana Thakura.
The first chapter of the Adi lila of Chaitanya Mangala describes the Janmalila, or birth pastimes, of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. The chapter first describes
the advent of the Lord's eternal associates, who appeared in this world before
Mahaprabhu Himself. Lochan Thakura describes the Lord as the remote and
immediate cause of creation, the Parabrahman, Shri Narayana Himself. That
Supreme Personality of Godhead descended within the womb of Sachidevi and
advented Himself upon this earth. In this way, gradually Sachi's womb grew day
by day, and her body assumed a supernatural effulgence. Seeing her wonderful
bodily effulgence, everyone was astonished, and thought, "Surely a great
personality is about to take birth from the womb of Shri Sachidevi." When her
"pregnancy" was in its sixth month, one day Advaita Acharya Prabhu went to the
house of Sachidevi and Jagannatha Mishra. Arriving there, he offered his
obeisances to the child in the womb of Mother Sachi and then circumambulated
her. Shacidevi and Jagannatha Mishra could not understand the cause of Advaita's
unusal behavior. In this way, Brahma, Shiva, and the other gods came to offer

[p.119]
their respects to that Supreme Personality of Godhead who had hidden himself
within the womb of Sachidevi, knowing well that he would soon advent Himself
in this world to deliver the lowest of men with the highest nectar of Krishna
prema. Detecting their presence, Sachidevi felt great joy. When the heart of
Sachidevi was full of mercy for the whole world, that is to say, when the most
merciful Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had completely filled her heart, gradually the
tenth month came. After this, taking advantage of an auspicious moment on the
full moon day in the month of Phalguna, in the midst of Hari-sankirtana, Shri
Guarachandra appeared like a golden moon from the ocean of the womb of
Mother Sachi. In this way, the Lord appeared on earth, and the ten directions were
jubilant. The gods and godesses, men and women, eager to see the moonlike face
of the son of Sachi, hurried to the house of Jagannatha Mishra and Sachidevi. In
this way, their home was transformed into Vaikuntha.
Jagannatha Mishra and all the residents of Nadiya who had turned out to
see that divine child were all struck with wonder to see his beauty. He had a neck
like a lion, arms like the trunks of elephants, and a broad chest. His lotus feet were
marked with the auspicious symbols of Lord Vishnu: a flag, a thunderbolt, a rod
for driving elephants. Seeing all these wonderful and superhuman manifestations
of divinity in the child, the people there were all astonished. Everyone speculated
about his supernatural origin, saying, "He is definitely not an ordinary human."
For eight days, the newborn child and its mother were quarantined, as is traditional
for childbirth in Bengal, and on the ninth day a great festival was held. At that
time, all the neighbors were filled with great joy to see the boy, and their attraction

[p.120]
for him increased.
The second chapter of the Adi Khanda describes the Lord's bala-lila
childhood pastimes. Here, Lochan das Thakura describes how after six months, the
grain-eating ceremony of Shri Gaurasundara was held, and after this the namegiving ceremony was performed. At the appearance of the Lord, the whole world
was delighted. Since the Lord gave pleasure to the whole world, the brahmanas
said his name should be Vishvambhara. Soon, Vishvambara began to walk, by
holding onto Jagannatha Mishra's finger with his tiny hand. The different women
in the village used to decorate him with different ornaments, and they would
wonder at the beautiful effulgence that emanated from the child, which was as
bright as millions of moons.The moon outside can brighten the darkness of night
only slightly, but the moon of Shri Gaurachandra can eliminate all darkness, both
within and without.
Shachidevi would sing to her son while threshing wheat, and at that time,
all the demigods and offer prayers to her son. Seeing this, Sachidevi wa quite
amazed. Sometimes she would see Gaurahari chanting the glories of RadhaKrishan with the gods and would become astonished and faint. When she heard
ankle-bells ringing on the bare feet of her child, again she was bewildered.
Sometimes she was afraid that ghosts were causing a disturbance, and sometimes
she would look in the mouth of her child, and, beholding the universal form,
become completely astonished.
In this way, gradually Gaurahari grew old enough to play outside, where he
astounded his newfound childhood friends with his divine antics. His playmates

[p.121]
were quite attached to him. Sachidevi would carry the baby Gaurahari in her arms
and watch after him carefully as he ran about, to keep him from smashing
everything as he played. Once, he explained to Mother Sachi the nature of things
pure and impure, instructing her on the aprakrita nature of Krishna, who is master
of everything. While sitting on a heap of broken clay pots soiled with leftovers, he
instructed his mother on jnana. Seeing his mother bewildered, he brought her
some coconut fruit. In this way, he performed many childhood pranks. He used to
play with puppydogs. When Sachidevi chastised him for playing with a dog, and
Gaurahari had to give up his pet, he cried tears of anger before Sachidevi. At that
time, he bestowed a divine spiritual body upon that dog while performing
Harikirtana. The dog went to Vaikuntha, and as Brahma, Shiva, and the other
demigods saw the good fortune of the dog they were all amazed. Sachidevi was
astonished at the activities of her son, who made her understand his Supreme
Position as the Absolute Lord.
The fourth chapter of the Adi Lila of Chaitanya Mangala describes the
Lord's pauganda, or boyhood lila. Having heard Murari Gupta reciting the
yogashastras, the Lord mimicked his gestures and speech, making fun of him and
then began to laugh uproariously. Thus Murari Gupta was enraged and chastised
the Lord with words of anger. In return, the boy, intending to express his
contempt for the conclusions of yogis went to Murari's afternoon lunch and
urinated on Murari Gupta's plate. After this, he instructed Murari Gupta on the
superiority of Krishna-bhakti. Finally, the author discusses Mahaprabhu's boyhood
performance of sankirtana, and relates what he heard from Damodara Pandit of

[p.122]
Murari Gupta's notes on the sannyasa of Vishvarupa, the Lord's older brother. He
also relates the lamentation of Sachidevi and Jagannatha upon their son's taking
sannyasa. He also recounts many other pastimes performed by the Lord as a boy.
At that time the Lord's hair-cutting ceremony took place. And soon thereafter, the
day of Hate-khare, or the first holding of chalk, came. On that day, to signify the
beginning of a child's formal education begins, he is given a piece of chalk and a
chalkboard, upon which he is to draw the letters of the alphabet. Upon beginning
his studies, the Lord was overjoyed to meet many new classmates. On the day that
his son's education began, Jagannatha Mishra was very pleased. That night,
however, he had a dream in which a brahmana appeared to him and told him that
his son Vishvambhara was Bhagavan Himself. Who can educate the Supreme
Lord, or discipline him as a small boy? From this, Jagannatha Mishra could
understand the supreme position of his child. When his dream broke, he was again
overwhelmed with the sentiments of parental love and soon forgot the dream.
At a particular time, the sacred thread ceremony of the boy was
performed. After this, there is a discussion of the four ages and the yuga-avatara.
In Dvapara-yuga, the Supreme Lord Himself, Shri Krishna the son of Nanda in
Vrindavana, makes his appearance on earth. In Kaliyuga, Shri Krishna, appearing
with the luster and mood of Shri Radha, advents himself as Shri Gauranga. By
performing Sankirtana, he establishes the religious principle for the age of Kali:
hari-nama-sankirtana. In order to establish the yuga-dharma, he comes as a
preacher. Maddened with Krishna-prema, he delivers all souls with the ecstasy of
love of God, by moving here and there and distributing divine love. While in his

[p.123]
grihastha-lila, he ordered his mother to refrain from eating grains on Ekadashi, in
this way instructed everyone to follow this injunction.
Gradually, Jagannatha Mishra fell ill, and passed away, entering into the
Lord's unmanifest pastimes. At that time, the Lord instructed Sachidevi on the
fleeting nature of a man's short life within the material world. He also explained
many other important principles of divine reality to her. With the passing of her
husband, Sachidevi greatly lamented. Gaurahari Himself also lamented the passing
of his father. After this time, he began paying close attention to his studies.
Chapter four describes the Lord's pastimes of youth and marriage. One
day, after school, the Lord was walking home from his teacher's house and at that
time he met Vanamali Acarya. As they talked, the Acharya made the Lord
understand that he had just been to see his mother Sachidevi, where he had been
making arrangements for the Lord's wedding. Sachidevi had rebuffed him, and
unable to secure her permission for the match, Vanamali was a little unhappy. In
this way, he was returning to his home, downcast. Shri Gaurahari returned home.
Without intimating anything of his conversation with the matchmaker, the Lord
informed her of his intentions to wed, saying that she should seek out Vanamali
and make the necessary arrangements for the wedding of her son. She did so, and
on the orders of Sachimata, Vanamali Acharya went to Vallabhacharya's house.
There he informed Vallabhacarya of the Lord's intent to wed Vallabhacarya's
daughter Lakshmidevi.
Having made all the arrangements for the wedding, Sachidevi informed all
her friends and relatives of the auspicious event and invited them to the occasion.

[p.124]
Everyone floated in the waves of the joyful ocean. In this way, Sachidevi made
preparations for her son's wedding. All the residents of Nadia turned out to see the
wedding. The relatives saw to it that all the old traditional Bengali wedding
customs were followed. The Hindu ceremony of besmearing the bridegroom and
bride with a paste of turmeric and then bathing them on the eve of the wedding
was performed, as were many other rituals. The place where the wedding was to
be performed was cleansed with sanctified water, and all the Vedic purificatory
rites were observed. All this took place at the house of Vallabhacharya. At last,
with great pomp and grandeur, in the midst of a great assembly of devotees,
relatives and friends, the wedding of Shri Gaurahari and Lakshmidevi was
performed in the house of Vallabhacarya. The Acharya himself performed the
Vedic wedding ceremony. He offered his new son-in-law sanctified water and
arghya to sweeten his lotus mouth. After this, he brought Lakshmidevi up on the
wedding stage and presented her to Gaurahari. Finally, the scriptural sacrifice that
is performed at weddings took place. After this, the brahmanas were fed
sumptuous prasadam at the conclusion of the wedding, and Shri Lakshmidevi was
escorted to her new home as the bride of Shri Gaurahari.
The Fifth Chapter of the Adi Khanda of Chaitanya Mangala describes
more of the Lord's pastimes of youth, including his tour of Bengal. After some
time the Lord journeyed down the banks of the Ganges, sanctifying that holy river
even further by the touch of his lotus footsteps. In order to provide for his new
family, the Lord set out for East Bengal, where he took up the occupation of
teaching. In this way he gave his mercy to the residents of East Bengal who lived

[p.125]
on the banks of the Padmavati river. When he returned to Bengal, he found that
Lakshmidevi had been unable to tolerate the pain of his absence. She was bitten by
the snake of separation and passed away into the unmanifest pastimes of the Lord.
Sachidevi was heartbroken and was consoled in her lamentation by Gaurahari who
glorified the sublime qualities of Lakshmidevi.
The Sixth Chapter of the Adi Khanda of Chaitanya Mangala describes the
arrangements made by Sachidevi for the Lord's second wedding. Through DvijaKashishvara it was arranged that he was to be wed to the daughter of Sanatana
Pandita, Vishnupriya devi. Here, the wedding of Vishnupriya and Gaurahari is
elaborately described.
The seventh chapter of the Adi Khanda describes the Lord's journey to
Gaya. Some time after the wedding of Gaurahari and Vishnupriyadevi, the Lord,
having completed his education busied himself in his teaching work. One day, he
left for Gaya to offer respects to his departed father. As he walked down the road,
everywhere, the birds and animals who saw him were stunned with ecstasy upon
beholding his lotus feet. After instructing a brahmana in Krishna-bhakti, the Lord
allowed a brahmana to drink the water of his lotus feet. That brahmana
immediately became free from all his bodily distress. At that time, the Lord also
instructed how the mysteries of Krishna-bhajana cannot be understood simply on
the basis of one's birth in a brahmana family. At last arriving in Gaya, the Lord
performed worship of the devas and pitris, in order to do his duty regarding his
departed father. While so engaged, he went to see the lotus feet of the Vishnu
Deity. At that time, the Lord met that best of Vaishnavas, Shri Ishvara Puri. At

[p.126]
that time, he prayed for the mercy of Ishvara Puri Prabhu, who, soon thereafter,
initiated him in the Krishnamantra. With this, the Lord's transcendental ecstasy
became manifest. After this, he went to take darshan of the lotus feet of Vishnu.
Upon seeing the Lord's holy feet, Shri Gaurahari was overwhelmed with prema
and exhibited his ecstasy by laughing, singing and dancing. Only a few days later,
he returned home.
From this point the first chapter of the Madhya Khanda begins. Here, the
author describes the Lord's pastimes as a teacher, and explains how he showed
mercy to his students. Praising her good fortune, the Lord showed his grace to
Sachimata. Soon after this he revealedsymptoms of mahaprema at the home of
Suklambara Brahmacari. This was the first time that he publicly revealed his
absorption in Krishna-prema, by showing the symptoms of great ecstasy, such as
swooning, tears shooting from the eyes, hairs of the body standing on end,
choking up of the voice, laughing madly, and so on. Performing sublime kirtan,
Shri Gaurahari drowned everyone in the waves of bliss. In this way the Supreme
Lord appeared as his own devotee in order to glorify the position of Bhakti.
After this, the Lord began his pastimes of preaching the glories of Shri
Krishna prema, engaging many devotees in preaching. He began organizing all
the devotees, beginning with Gadadhara, as well as many devotees from within
and wihtout Bengal. One day the Lord went to the house of Shrivasa and his
brothers. At that time, the devotees could hear the flute of Krishna. At that time
the Lord became overwhelmed by the mood of Shrimati Radhika. In the madness
of separation, he began laughing and crying. Sometimes he would fall completely

[p.127]
silent and his mood became grave. In thiw ay he manifest differing divine moods.
At that time, a divine voice siad, "O Vishvambhara! You are the Lord Himself.
For the purpose of preaching Krishna-prema, you have descended within this
world."
Later, at the house of Murari Gupta, the Lord would reveal his form as the
Varaha avatara. At that time, Murari offered prayers before the Lord in great
ecstasy, and the Lord told him to serve Krishna the son of Nanda, following in the
footsteps of the residents of Vrindvana. Murari Gupta wanted to see the form of
Shri Ramachandra. At that time the Lord instructed him on the glories of the holy
name of Krishna. At last, the devatas headed by Lord Brahma appeared before the
Lord, praying for Krishna-prema and attained Krishna-prema by the mercy of Shri
Gauranga. After this, the kirtan-performer Suklambhara Brahmachari began
chanting "Jai Radhe! Jai Govinda!" and attained the mercy of Shri Chaitanya.
After this, Lochan dasa Thakura describes the glories of Shri Shri GauraGadadhara.
In the second chapter of the Madhya Khanda, the author describes the
beauty of Shri Gauranga's divine form. The Lord performed a miracle by planting
a mango seed that immediately became a mango tree with fully ripened fruit for
the satisfaction of the devotees. Whoever ate the fruit of that tree was delivered
from the tree of material existence. The Lord instructed Mukunda Datta on the
supremacy of Krishna bhakti, and how one should give up thinking of the body
and mind and think only of the worshipable service of Krishna. The Lord gave his
blessings to Murari Gupta. The Lord's pastimes of kirtana at the house of Shrivasa

[p.128]
Thakura are described. When a foolish brahman remarked that the murti of Shri
Krishna is a product of Maya, the Lord jumped in the Ganges with his clothes on,
to purify himelf from the offender.
The third chapter of the Madhya-Khanda describes the glories of Shri
Advaita. Here, the author describes the Lord's pastimes with Advaita, how he
performed kirtan in the house of Advaita, and how they embraced in ecstasy. A
brahman who tried to stop the kirtan of Mahaprabhu by attempting to frighten
Shrivasa Pandita was bewildered by the Lord's mayic potency. Also described is
how the Lord, in the house of Shrivasa, performed the worship known as Gadapuja, wherein the club of Vishnu is worshiped in order to invoke the Lord's power
in smashing the atheists. This chapter also explains the visit paid by Advaita to
Nabadwipa, how Advaita bowed before Shri Gauranga, and danced in ecstasy
before him, realizing that his prayers for Krishna's descent had been fulfilled.
When Shrivasa Thakura inquired into the glories of Advaita, Mahaprabhu
described Advaita-tattva, and advised everyone to worship Shri Hari.
In the fourth chapter of the Madhyama Khanda, Shri Gaurahari explains
the esoteric meaning of "Shrivasa." Murari Gupta's book, "Raghubhirashtaka" is
discussed. The Lord writes "Ramdasa" on Murari's forehead. He reveals himself
as Rama and orders Rama Pandita, the brother of Shrivasa Pandita to serve
Shrivasa. The devotees are sent to search for Nityananda. The Lord meets
Nityananda at the house of Nandana Acharya. The Lord explains the glories of
Shri Nityananda and how it is that by Nityananda's mercy one may attain Krishnaprema. At that time, the Lord reveals his six-armed, four-armed, and two-armed

[p.129]
forms to Nityananda.
The fifth chapter of the Madhya-Khanda reveals how, late at night, the
Lord was weeping tears of ecstatic love for Krishna. He discussed his dream with
Sachidevi. The story of how Nityananda Prabhu spent two days at the house of
Advaita Acharya is recounted. Nityananda Prabhu's prema is described. The
worship by Advaita of Mahaprabhu in the house of Shrivasa Pandita is described.
The meeting of the Lord and Haridasa Thakura. The author also tells how
Nityananda's kaupin was saved by Mahaprabhu, who later had the devotees wear it
as a kavacha. Mahaprabhu's trance and the devotees' separation from the Lord is
also described. The ecstasy of the devotees upon the Lord's reawakening is also
described.
The sixth chapter of the Madhya-Khanda discusses the following subjects:
How Gaurahari enjoyed pastimes of prema in the midst of the devotees; his
meeting with Haridasa Thakura; His visit at the house of Advaita; his order to
Advaita to preach Krishna-prema without any consideration of fitness and
unfitness; His order to all the devotees to preach nama-prema and thus deliver
everyone; the effects of nama-bhasa; How the Lord would wander through the
streets of Nadiya performing Nama-kirtana; the story of the deliverance of Jagai
and Madhai. After this, the author glorifies the mercy of Shri Nityananda and Shri
Gauranga.
The seventh chapter of the Madhyama-Khanda describes the following
subjects: How the Lord cast his merciful glance upon the son of an East Bengal
brahmana named Vanamali; the brahmana, and, seeing the Shyamansundra form

[p.130]
of the Lord, he offered many prayers to Shri Gauranga. After this, the Lord
revealed his Nrishimha manifestation at the house of Shrivasa. He bestowed mercy
upon a follower of Shiva. After a brahman lady touched his feet, he jumped into
the Ganges. The Lord gave instructions regarding the worship of Shri Hari. His
mercy towards Shrivasa is described as are Mukunda's prayers, the Lord's
manifestation of His Godhood, and Shrivas Pandit's abhishek of Mahaprabhu. The
author's glorification of the qualities of Shri Gauranga and his instructions on the
worship of Shri Gauranga conclude the chapter.
The eighth chapter of the Madhyama Khanda describes the following
subjects: How the envious brahmana who was stricken with leprosy prayed for
forgiveness in order to become freed from the sin of Vaishnava aparadha and was
delivered by the mercy of Shrivasa Thakura; how a brahmana was forbidden to
enter the Lord's nocturnal kirtan and how the Lord danced in ecstasy when that
brahmana then cursed the Lord never to enjoy the pleasures of samsara. How the
Lord in the mood of Balarama demanded honey is described. The assembly of
devotees at the house of Advaita is described. The visit of the devotees headed by
Acharyaratna is recorded. How all of them saw the Lord's manifestation of
Balarama and bathed in the Ganges is also described.
The ninth chapter of the Madhyama Khanda of Shri Chaitanya Mangala
records the following subjects: the Lord's manifestation of Varaha; How the
devotees headed by Advaita were ordered to preach and perform sankirtana; how
the mood and qualities of the gopis was glorified in kirtan; how Shrivasa in the
dress of Narada glorified Gadadhara Pandita; a discussion of the divine correlation

[p.131]
between Shri Gadadhara and Shri Radhika; Thakur Haridas's visit; the ecstasy of
Sankirtana; the Lord's mad manifestation of the mood of Vaikuntha opulence;
How the Lord, in the dress of Lakshmidevi rendered service to the Lord in great
ecstasy; How the Lord expressed the inner moods of the personality of Godhead.
The Tenth Chapter of the Madhyama-Khanda of Chaitanya Mangala
describes the following: The Lord tells Shrivasa of the different religious
principles for the different ages and how Sankirtan is the best religious principle in
the age of Kali. In the mood of Shri Radha the Lord began asking "Where is
Vrindavan? Where is Lalita?" in great anxiety. Murari Gupta consoled him, and
they all performed kirtana. In a dream Sachidevi sees Gaurahari receive the
sannyasa mantra from Keshava Bharati. The Lord's powerful separation from
Krishna is described. Worried that the Lord will take sannyasa, the devotees are
heartbroken. Mahaprabhu consoles the devotees.
The Eleventh Chapter of Madhyama Khanda describes the following:
Upon hearing of the Lord's sannyasa, Sachidevi's lamentation; Her entreaty to
Gaurahari to remain a grihastha; The Lord's advice to everyone to worship
Krishna; His different attempts to console his mother and his revevlation of the
divine form of Krishna to her.
The twelfth chaper of the madhyama khanda discusses the following
subjects: The lamentation of Vishnupriyadevi; the Lord's sweet words of
pacification to her and his instructions regarding divine reality, as well as his
revelation of of his four-handed Narayana form; the visit by Shrivasa and Murari,
the Lord's attempt to pacify them.

[p.132]
The thirteenth chapter describes the following: The Lord's attemtp to
console the devotees, and his instructions on different truths; with the aim to take
sannyasa, he swims across the Ganges and meets Keshava Bharati at Katwa;
Sachimata and Vishnupriya faint; Nityananda Prabhu tries to pacify them; Headed
by Chandrashekhara Acharya and Damodara Pandit, all the devotees follow
Nityananda Prabhu to Katwa where the sannyasa is taking place. The Lord asks
for the sannyasa mantra from Keshava Bharati; The Lord first gives the sannyasa
mantra to Bharati and then hears it from him; the lamentation of all the devotees at
the sannyasa of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu; The Lord's attempt to pacify them;
the Lord's eagerness for Krishna-bhakti; the giving of the name Shri Krishna
Chaitanya; At the conclusion of sannyasa the Lord's wandering half-mad in the
Radadesha.
The fourteenth chapter describes how Chandrashekara returns from Katwa
to Nadia bearing news to Sachimata and Vishnupriya; their lamentation;
Nityananda Prabhu causes Mahaprabhu to detour to Shantipura; the Lord's vist
there; Nityananda's conversation with Sachidevi; the devotees of Nadiya go to the
house of Advaita in Shantipur to see the Lord; the Lord's reciprocation of affection
with the residents of Nadiya, and their separation.
The fifteenth chapter describes the Lord's deliverance of all souls through
the performance of nam-sankirtan, and how he bestowed upon all the jivas the
supreme goal of life. After this his journey to Jagannatha Puri is described as well
as the humility of Haridasa Thakura, the exodus of devotees who went to Puri to
be with the Lord, His sweet words of consolation, how the Lord used to chant the

[p.133]
shloka, "rama-raghava raksha mam," on his way to Puri, how Nityananda Prabhu
broke his sannyasa danda, and how the Lord manifest his pastimes of anger with
Nityananda after the breaking of his danda.
The sixteenth chapter of the Madhyama Khanda describes how on the way
to Jagannatha Puri, the devotees bathed in a place called Brahma-kunda; how they
went to Remuna and had dashan on the Lord there; how the Lord danced before
the Gopal deity; how after bathing in the Vaitarani river they had darshan of
Varaha-deva; how the Lord went to Yajapura; How the Lord took darshan of a
Shiva-linga there; Then, from Brahma-kunda, he visited Nabhigaya and
Shivanagara; how he received the darshan of Kshirodakshayi Vishnu; how in a
grove of mangos he took up the question of Shiva Prasada and prayers to Shiva;
after this, how he went from Kapoteshwara and bathed in the Bhargavi river; How
the Lord fainted before the Jagannatha deities while having darshan there; his visit
to the house of Sarvabhauma; How the Lord would go from the house of
Sarvabhauma, take a position west of the Garuda Stambha, and see the deity of
Lord Jagannatha; how Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya and the Lord discussed
Vedanta; How Sarvabhauma was converted; How the Lord revealed his six-armed
form to Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya.
From here, the Shesha Khanda begins. The first chapter of the Shesha
Khanda describes: the Lord's kirtan pastimes in which Sarvabhauma took part; the
Lord's tour of South India and his journey to Setubandha; his mercy on Vasudeva
Vipra, the brahmana who had leprosy; the Lord's visit to Jiyada-Nrishimha and its
ancient history; the Lord's meeting with Ramananda Raya on the banks of the

[p.134]
Godavari; Ramananda's vision of Mahaprabhu's dual feature as Rasaraja and
Mahabhava; the Lord's visit to Panchavati and Shri Rangam; How he bestowed
mercy on Trimalla Bhatta; His four month stay in Shri Rangam during the period
of Chatur Masya; his meeting with Paramananda Puri; the prayers by
Paramananda Puri to Gaura Bhagvan.
The second chapter of the Shesh Khanda describes the following: How the
Lord continued on his South Indian tour and delivered the seven trees that had
been standing since the time of Lord Ram; How at Setubandha in great ecstasy,
the Lord chanted the names of Rama, Lakshman, Sita, and Hanuman; how the
Lord returned to Alalanatha by way of the Godavari; his return to Jagannatha Puri;
His visit to Mathura; His meeting with Rupa and Sanatana; How with Balabhadra
Bhattacharya, he wandered down the banks of the Yamuna and through the twelve
forests of Vrindavana.
The third and final chapter of the Shesh Khanda of Chaitanya Mangala
records how: the Lord returned to Jagannatha Puri; the Lord's trip to Gauda-desha;
how he passed through in the Rada-desha; how he stopped in Kuliya; How
everyone in Navadwip turned out to see the Lord; How they prayed for His mercy
and he bestowed amnesty on all; How, to satisfy his mother's desire, he went to
Nabadwipa and instructed her on of Krishna-bhajan; How the Lord went to
Shantipura where he visited Shri Advaita; His kirtan there; How the Lord left
Shantipura; His return to Jagannatha Puri; How he visited the deity of Jagannatha;
how he performed kirtana day and night; How King Prataparudra attained the
Lord's mercy; His revelation of the six-armed form to Prataparudra Raja; The

[p.135]
Dravidian brahmana who come to visit the Lord, how he was fasting for seven
days, and how he was delivered by the Lord's mercy.
In the Chaitanya Mangala, Lochan Dasa Thakura mentions the details of
certain pastimes not revealed by Vrindvana Dasa Thakura. For example,
Vrindavana Dasa Thakura does not record the conversation that took place
between Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Vishnupriya Devi just before the Lord
left to take sannyasa. But Lochan Das Thakura describes this as follows:
"Seeing Mahaprabhu's eagerness to take sannyasa, the moon-faced
Vishnupirya-devi said, with her voice choked in emotion, " Tell me, O Prananatha,
Lord of my life, and I shall take your order upon my head. Will you take
sannyasa? I have heard this rumor being circulated among the people in general.
Hearing this, my heart is broken. If it is true, I shall enter into fire. You are the
treasure of my life. Your beautiful form is always everfresh and newly youthful.
Will you give up everything and go away? If am deprived of your association, I
might as well give up my life by drinking poison."
Hearing the pitiful words of lamentation spoken by Vishnupriya devi, Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu smiled a little, and spoke as follows: "Listen, O you who
are dear as life itself: Please don't be in any anxiety. There is no need to worry at
all. What I am about to say is for your own benefit. Please hear me attentively,
with your whole mind. Whatever you see in this world is all false; the only truth is
Bhagavan and theVaishnavas, without that whatever you see is all illusion. Know
this for a fact. Sons, wives, husbands, ladies, fathers, mothers, and everything
else—all these relationships are illusory. They are temporary and transitional. In

[p.136]
one lifetime we have one set of sons, wives, husbands, mothers and fathers, and in
our next life this changes. Other than the lotus feet of Krishna, we have no real
family. Everything else that we see as our family is an illusion of maya. What we
see as man and woman is unreal. Beneath the surface all souls are spiritual
energy; the relationship between men and women is an illusory connection of
maya. Shri Krishna is the real husband of everyone; he is the master. Everything
else is material, but unfortunately this is not understood by the people in general.
The souls is embedded in a mixture of semen and blood from which it is born into
a body composed of stool and urine. In this way the soul moves upon this earth in
ignorance. From boyhood to youth to old age, we suffer different miseries, all the
while mistaking the housing of this body as our real self. Absorbed in false ego,
we make friends, maintain attachments, suffering abuse, and are gradually cheated
by old age. Even hearing the truth, however, still our eyes are blind, and while our
suffering in the material world brings us to tears, we never worship Govinda.
Fosaking Krishna's service, we maintain these bodies in the material world
of birth and death, trapped in the bondage of maya. Mad with false ego we have
forgotten our Lord, and so we insure our passage to hell. Your name is
Vishnupriya, however. Fulfill the real purport of Vishnupriya, and do not lament
for what is false. Remembering what I have said here, cast your worries at a
distance, and always think of Krishna within your heart, day and night."
Having conveyed all these divine instructions to Vishnupriya devi, the
Supreme Lord, Shri Gaurasundara revealed to her His four-armed form, thus
making her understand his absolute position. At that time, he told Vishnupriya

[p.137]
devi, "You see before you the Supreme Lord, cast your mayik lamentaion away."
At this, Vishnupriya devi became joyful within. Her grief and pain vanished, and
her heart became blissful upon suddenly seeing the Lord's four-armed form.
After hearing the instructions of the Lord and seeing his absolute form,
Vishnupriya cast off her bewilderment, but her mentality of taking the Lord as her
husband was intact. At that point, she fell at the feet of the Lord and said: "O
Lord, please listen to my entreaty. Falling at your feet again and again, I implore
you to accept my humble submission. I am certainly the lowest, having taken birth
in this world of samsara; but you are my most dear Lord of life. This is my only
wealth; without you I have nothing. Without your service, I will certainly go
down." Saying this, Vishnupriya devi began loudly weeping, sobbing and sobbing
again and again in ever-increasing frenzy of sorrow. Seeing the affliction of
someone so dear, the Lord bestowed his merciful glance upon Vishnupriya devi,
embracing her with his eyes and so giving her his mercy.
At that time, the Lord said, "Listen O Vishnupriya devi, and give close
attention to my answer to your words. I shall go there and there, but wherever I go,
I shall still remain at your place: This truth I have spoken with great
determination."
Upon hearing the order of the Lord, Vishnupriya devi could understand
that the Lord is supremely independent. At that time she said, "You must do what
makes you happy. Let no one be an obstacle to your divine mission."
Addressing the Lord in this way, Vishnupriya tearfully averted her eyes
from the Lord's glance and fell silent. Thus went the conversation between the

[p.138]
Lord and Vishnupriya, which is painful to hear. This is reported by Lochan Dasa.
Lochan Dasa Thakura also sings the glories of Shri Gauranga and Nityananda in
the following beautiful song:
parama karuna pahun dui jana
nitai gaurachandra
saba avatara, sara shiromani
kevala ananda kanda
bhaja bhaja bhai, chaitanya nitai
sudhrida visvasa kori
vishaya chariya se rase majiya
mukha bolo hari hari
dekho ore bhai, tribhuvane nai
emona doyala data
pashu-pakhi jhure, pashana vidore
shuni yar guna gantha
samsare majiya, rahile pariya
se pade nahilo asha
apana koroma, bhunjaye shamana,
kohoye locana dasa
This song was especially dear to His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada who translates it is follows:
"This is a song by Locan dasa Thakura. Locan dasa declares that the two Lords,
Nitai-Gauracandra—Lord Nitai and Lord Chaitanya—are very merciful. They are

[p.139]
the essence of all incarnations. The specific significance of these incarnations is
that prosecuting their way of self-realization is simply joyful, for they introduced
chanting and dancing. There are many incarnations, like Lord Rama and even
Krishna, who taught Bahgavad-gita, which requires knowledge and understanding.
But Lord Chaitanya introduced a process which is simply joyful—simply chant
and dance. Therefore Lochan Das requests everyone: "My dear brother, I request
that you just worship Lord Chaitanya and Nityananda with firm conviction and
faith." Don't think that this chanting and dancing will not lead to the desired goal.
It will. It is the assurance of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu that one will get all
perfection by this process. Therefore one must chant with firm faith and
conviction.
But what is the process? If one wants to be Krishna conscious by this
process, one has to give up his engagement in sense gratification. That is the only
restriction. If one gives up sense gratification, it is sure that he will reach the
desired goal. One simply has to chant "Hari Hari!" without any motive of sense
gratification.
Lochan das says, "My dear brother, you just try and examine this. Within
the three worlds there is no one like Lord Chaitanya or Lord Nityananda, because
Their merciful qualities are so great that They make even birds and beasts cry,
what to speak of human beings." Actually, when Lord Chaitanya passed through
the forest known as Jharikhanda, the tigers, elephants, snakes, deer, and all other
animals joined Him in chanting Hare Krishna. It is so nice that anyone can join.
Even teh animals can join, what to speak of human beings. Of course, it is not

[p.140]
possible for ordinary men to induce animals to chant, but if Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu could inspire animals to chant, at least we can encourage human
beings to adopt this path of Hare Krishna mantra chanting. It is so nice that even
the most stonehearted man will be melted. It is so nice that even stone will melt.
But Lochan dasa Thakura regrets that he is entrapped by sense
gratification. He addresses himself, "My dear mind, you are entrapped in this
sense gratification process, and you have no attraction for chanting Hare Krishna.
Since you have no attraction for the lotus feet of Lord Chaitanya and Lord
Nityananda, what can I say? I can simply think of my misfortune. Yamaraja, the
superintendent of death, is punishing me by not allowing me to be attracted by this
movement."
Shri Lochan Dasa Thakura was born in Shakabda 1445 and disappeared in
1540.

Lokanatha Goswami

Lokanatha Goswami is mentioned as follows in the Chaitanya
Charitamrita: sange gopala-bhatta, dasa-raghunatha, raghunatha bhatta-gosai, ara
lokanatha: When Rupa Goswami stayed at Mathura, he was accompanied by
Gopala Bhatta Goswami, Raghunatha dasa Goswami, Raghunatha Bhatta
Goswami and Lokanatha dasa Goswami. Shri Bhaktivedanta Swami gives the
following information about Shri Lokanatha Goswami: "Shri Lokanatha Goswami

[p.141]
was a personal associate of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and a great devotee of the
Lord. He was a resident of a village named Talakhadi in the district of Yashohara
in Bengal. Previously he lived in Kachnapara. His father's name was Padmanabha,
and his only younger brother was Pragalbha. Following the orders of Shri
Chaitanya mahaprabhu, shri Lokanatha went to Vrindavana to live. He established
a temple named Gokulananda. Shrila Narottama Das Thakura selected Lokanatha
das Goswami to be his spirtual master, and he was his only disciple. Because
Lokanatha dasa Goswami did not want his name mentioned in Chaitanya
Charitamrita, we do not often see it in that celebrated book. On the E.B.R.
Railroad, the Yashohara station is located in Bangladesh. From the railway station
one has to go by bus to the village of Sonakhali and from there to Khejura. From
there one has to walk, or, during the rainy sedason, go by boat to the village of
Talakhadi. In this village there are still descendants of Lokanatha Goswami [i.e.,
descendants of his brother, see below.]."
A pranam mantra for Lokanatha Goswami has been written by Narottama
Dasa Thakura. It reads:
srimad-radha-vinodaikaseva-sampat-samanvitam
padmanabhatmajam shrimallokanatha prabhum bhaje

"I worship the lotus feet of Shrila Lokanatha Prabhu, the son of Shri Padmanabha.
He is a storehouse of singleminded service to the lotus feet of Shri Shri Radha-

[p.142]
Vinoda."
In the village of Talakhori Gram in the Yashohara district, lived the mother
and father of Shri Lokanatha Goswami. His father's name was Padmanabha and
his mother's name was Shri Sitadevi. Shri Padmanabha Bhattacharya was a very
dear follower of Shri Advaita Acharya. One day, Shri Lokanatha Goswami took
his birth in the house of Shri Padmanabha and Shri Sita Devi. His younger
brother's name was Shri Pragalabha Bhattacharya. The descendents of Pragalabha
still live in Talakhori Gram.
From his early childhood, Shri Lokanatha was indifferent to family life.
One day, giving up his mother and father, and leaving his home behind forever, he
went to Mayapura in Nabadwipa to take darshan of the holy feet of Shri Gauranga.
Shri Gaurangadeva embraced Lokanatha Goswami with great affection, and soon
he ordered Lokanatha Goswami to quickly go to Vrindavana. But Lokanatha
Goswami could understand by certain evidence that Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
would leave home and take sannyasa within two or three days. Therefore, he was
in great anxiety.
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu could understand the mind and heart of
Lokanatha Goswami and consoled him, saying, "We shall be reunited in
Vrindavana."
In this connection, Shrila Narahari Chakravarti has written in his BhaktiRatnakara: "While he was weeping and weeping, crying out his heart at the lotus
feet of Shri Chaitanya, Lokanatha felt himself being caught up and embraced by
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Later, as Lokanatha bid him farewell, the Lord gave

[p.143]
him a confidential message which consoled him greatly. After this, he offered his
soul at the lotus feet of Shriman Mahaprabhu, and after giving his pranamas to the
all the devotees, he went on his way."
After this, Lokanatha never returned to home life. Rather, afflicted with
deep separation from Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, he began wandering from one
holy place of pilgrimage to the next. Gradually, after visiting many holy places, he
came to Vrindavana Dham.
In the meantime, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa and went to
Jagannatha Puri. After staying in Puri for some time, the Lord had a mind to
deliver the fallen souls, and so began his tour of South India. Hearing of the Lord's
tour of South India, Shri Lokanatha also went to South India, in search of the
Lord.
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, after visiting many holy places of pilgrimage
in South India and again returning to Jagannatha Puri for some time, finally came
to Vrindavana. Hearing of this, Lokanatha Goswami quickly went to Vrindavan.
Meanwhile, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had already left for Prayaga-dham. Arriving
in Vrindavana and not seeing Mahaprabhu, Lokanatha was heartbroken. He
resolved to set everything right by starting out the very next morning for Prayaga,
to meet the Lord. That night the Lord came to him in a dream and consoled him,
saying, "O Lokanatha, stay in Vrindvana. I have not broken my vow. I have
already come to Vrindavana and live there in another form. In this way you shall
always maintain my connection."
A few days later, Shrila Lokanatha Goswami chanced to meet the most

[p.144]
dear followers of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu: Shri Rupa, Shri Sanatana, Shri
Gopala Bhatta, Shri Bhugarbha and others. The exchange of divine love between
them was wonderful to behold! They were all of one mind, one heart. In the midst
of the Goswamis, Shri Lokanatha was the oldest. He was fully absorbed in prema.
In his mangalaracana to the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, Shri Sanatana Goswami offers his
respects to Lokanatha Goswami as follows:
vrindavan priyan vande shri govinda padashritan
shrimad-kashishvaram lokanatam shri krishnadasakam
"I offer my obeisances unto Shri Kashishvara Pandit, Shri Lokanatha Goswami
and Shri Krishnadas Kaviraja Goswami who are very dear to Shri Govinda in
Vrindavan, having taken shelter at his lotus feet."
Shri Lokanatha Goswami wandered throughout all twelve forests of
Vrindavan in great ecstasy. In one of the forests there is a village named Umarao.
There he stayed for some time on the banks of Kishori-kunda. He had a great
desire to establish the worship of the deity and render service to Krishna in that
way. Understanding Lokanath's aspiration to serve, Krishna Himself appeared
before him and offered Lokanatha a vigraha, saying, "Worship this Deity here.
This deity's name is Radha-vinoda. After giving him this beautiful deity, the Lord
suddenly disappeared.
At this, Lokanatha Goswami became stricken with anxiety. Seeing him
absorbed in worry, Radhavinoda smiled and said, "Why have you brought me
here? I have come here personally just to satisfy your purpose. What do you want
from me? I live in the forest here, near the village of Umarao. By this Kishori

[p.145]
kunda you see before you, I make my residence. You must now give me
something to eat. Quickly."
Lokanatha Goswami's joy knew no bounds. He floated in the waves of
prema. After this he prepared an offering for the Lord to eat. After offering fine
rice ona fresh banana leaf to the deity he experienced great ecstasy by offering his
life at the lotus feet of the Lord. He was stunned by drinking in the nectarine
beauty of the Lord. After this he offered a bed of flowers and made the Lord rest.
Shri Lokanatha Goswami made this place his home. The local villagers
and cowherd men wanted to construct a bhajan kutir for him, but he refused to
accept it. In order to protect the deity, he prepared a cloth bag which he would
keep around his neck at all times. Shri Radhavinoda became like a jeweled
necklace around the neck of Lokanatha Goswami. The cloth bag was his temple.
This was Lokanatha Goswami's practice until the day he disappeared from this
earth, and is an example of the strict vairagya he maintained. With great care he
always stayed in the association of the Goswamis of Vrindavana.
It is very difficult to exhaustively describe the life and pastimes of
Lokanatha Goswami who was very dear to Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. When
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and his dear followers beginning with Shri Rupa and
Shri Sanatana disappeared, Shrila Lokanatha Goswami could not tolerate the
separation. After this his only purpose in life was to establish the wishes of Shri
Chaitanya Mahprabhu.
Shrila Lokanatha Goswami gave mantra diksha to Shri Narottama Dasa
Thakura. There is no mention in the shastras that he accepted any other disciples.

[p.146]
Narottam Thakura served him in secret by going in the dead of night to the place
where Lokanatha would pass stool and urine and cleansing the area very carefully.
Seeing Narottama's humility, Lokanatha accepted him.
Shrila Lokanatha Goswami, in his ripe old age, while performing his
bhajan in Khadiravan in Khayara Gram, passed away and entered into the eternal
unmanifest pastimes of the Lord. At that place is a kunda called Shri Yugala
Kunda. On the banks of that kunda, Shrila Lokanatha Goswami entered into
samadhi.
It is said that when Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami went to Lokanatha
Goswami and asked his blessings to compile the Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita,
Lokanatha Goswami gave his blessings, but prohibited Kaviraja Goswami from
mentioning his name in the Chaitanya Charitamrita. For fear of violating the order
of Lokanatha, Kaviraj Goswami has only briefly mentioned him in the Chaitanya
Charitamrita. On the day of Krishnastami in the month of Shravana, he entered
into the eternal pastimes of the Lord.
Shrila Narottama Dasa Thakura Mahashaya prays as follows at the lotus
feet of his gurudeva:
ha ha prabhu lokanatha, rakha padadvandve
kripadrishthye chaha yadi haiya anande
manovancha siddhi habe hang purna trishna
hethaya chaitanya mile setha radhakrishna
tumi na karile daya ke kairbe ara
manera vasana purna kara eibara

[p.147]
ei tini samsare mora ara keho nai
kripa kari nija padatale deha thai
radhakrishna lilaguna gao ratri dine
narottama vancha purna nahe tuwa vine
"O Lokanatha, O gurudeva! If you are pleased with me, please keep me in the
shelter of your lotus feet, and cast your merciful glance upon me. by your mercy I
can find the perfection of inner fulfillment. And by your mercy I can someday
meet Shri Chaitanya and Radha-Krishna. If you are not merciful to me, then what
shall I do? Please, just once, fulfill my heart's desire. In the three worlds of birth
and death no one is more in need of your mercy. Please give me your mercy and
give me a place at your lotus feet. Day and night I sing the qualities and pastimes
of Radha and Krishna. Still, the inner aspirations of Narottama for the service of
Shri Shri Radha-Govinda and Chaitanya Mahaprabhu can only be realized through
your grace, O Lokanatha Goswami Prabhu. "

Lives of the Saints
Madhva
According to the Sri Kurma inscriptions of Narahari Tirtha, his direct
disciple, Sripad Madhvacarya was born between 1238 and lived for 79 years, until
1317 A.D. This is confirmed in the Anu-Madhva-Carita. According to the
authorized biographies compiled by his disciples shortly after his passing away,
Sripad Madhva was born in the village of Tulunada, which is located about 8

[p.148]
miles to the southeast of the city of Udipi in Karnataka. He came from a family of
sivalli-brahmanas and was the son of Madhyageha Bhatta.
In his Caitanya Caritamrta commentary (CC Madhya 9.245), Sripad
Bhakdivedanta Swami comments as follows: “In his childhood, Madhvacarya was
known as Vasudeva, and there are some wonderful stories surrounding him. It is
also said that his father piled up many debts, and Madhvacarya converted tamarind
seeds into actual coins to pay them off. When he was five years old, he was
offered the sacred thread. A demon named Maniman lived near his abode in the
form of a snake, and at the age of five, Madvacarya killed that snake with the toe
of his left foot. When his mother was very disturbed, he would appear before her
in one jump. He was a great scholar even in childhood, and although his father did
not agree, he accepted sannyasa at the age of twelve.”
When he was only 12 years old, Madhvacarya left home and accepted the
renounced order of life, under the guidance of Acyutapreksa, his sannyasa-guru.
Madhva's sannyasa name was Purnaprajna Tirtha. His deep study of the scriptures
was unparalleled, and had convinced him of the uselessness of the Advaita
interpretation of Vedanta. He was inspired to revive the original and pure
interpretation of Vedanta which promotes personal theism. He was to do this on
the basis of a profound and innovative interpretation of the scriptures, for which
he was to become famous. This interpretation is known as Dvaita-dvaita-vada, or
pure dualism.
After his initiation, Purnaprajna spent some time in the asrama of
Acyutapreksa where he carefully studied the Vedanta commentaries of different

[p.149]
acaryas, beginning with the ^stasiddhi of Vimuktatman. But soon, Purnaprajna's
expertise in scriptural argument and his determination to establish personal theism
as the conclusion of Vedanta grew to the point where he could defeat
Acyutapreksa in argument. Recognizing Purnaprajna's superior scholarship,
Acyutapreksa made him the head of his asrama. Purnaprajna was also awarded
the title ananda-tirtha, by which he is often referred to in various scriptural
literatures.
After he became the temple authority in the asrama of Acyutapreksa,
Purnaprajna began training disciples, preaching his interpretation of Vedanta and
defeating many scholars from different schools of philosophy, including
Buddhists, Jains, Advaitins, and various impersonalists, agnostics, logicians, and
the practioners of materialistic religion. His success in defeating all opposing
scholars inspired him to tour South India in an attempt to preach the philosophy of
personal theism and devotion to Visnu far and wide. At this time, he had
completely formulated all the details of his philosophical system, but had not yet
committed his system to writing.
His tour of South India was quite extensive: it took him from Udipi to the
southernmost tip of India, (Kanyakumari)and from there to Ramesvaram, Sri
Rangam, and many other important holy places of pilgrimage. Wherever he went
he debated the prominent scholars of the impersonal school, smashing their
interpretations of Vedanta with his brilliant advocacy of dualistic theism. His
scathing criticisms of Sankaracarya's impersonal Vedanta met with stiff
opposition, but no one could overcome him in scriptural argument or logical

[p.150]
debate. It is said that when Madvha was at Kanyakumari he was challenged by a
great impersonalist scholar of the Sankara school to write his own commentary on
Vedanta if he disagreed with the teachings of the master. At that time, it is said
that Madhva promised to write his own Vedanta commentary, fully elaborating the
proper conclusions of personal theism. At Sri Rangam he also expressed a certain
degree of dissatisfaction with the conclusions of Ramanuja's visistadvaita-vada, in
that he felt it did not go far enough to refute the dangerous speculative philosophy
of Sankaracarya. This further added to the young Madhva's firm determination to
someday compose his own commentary incorporating his own unique
interpretation.
After completing his South Indian tour, Madhva decided to tour North
India as well. With his resolve to complete his own Vedanta commentary growing
day by day, he was eager to begin the work. But Madhva wanted to have the
blessings of the author of Vedanta, Vedavyasa himself, before beginning such an
ambitious project. He set out for North India and the Himalays, then, in order to
achieve the benedictions of Vedavyasa, for it was said that Vyasa, being immortal,
still resided in his asrama at Badarainatha, although he never made himself visible
to mortal eyes.
After a long journey by foot, Sripad Madhva finally arrived at the
Anantamatha at Badarinatha. There he remained for seven weeks, absorbed in
fasting, prayer, and devotional meditation. Inspired from within, he hiked further
up into the Himalayas, to Badarikasrama, in upper Badari, where Vyasadeva has
his hermitage. There he met Vedavyasa and explained his commentary on

[p.151]
Bhagavad-gita to Vyasa himself, who approved. When he met Vyasa, he was
given a salagrama-sila which is known as Astamurti. After discussing the
scriptures with Vyasadeva, Sripad Madhvacarya's understanding of their inner
meaning became even more profound. He remained at Badarikasrama for some
months until he finished composing his commentary on Bhagavad-gita,
whereupon he returned to the Anantamatha. At that time Madhva's companion
Satya Tirtha wrote down the entire commentary. At this time, Madhva also wrote
his commentary on Vedanta.
Bidding farewell to Badarinatha, Madhva began the long journey home.
On the way, he again met with and defeated many scholars of various
philosophical schools. He traveled through Bihar, Bengal, Orissa, and
andhradesa. The Madhva-vijaya describes how when Madhva reached Ganjama,
on the banks of the river Godavari, hed met two prominent scholars, who were
well-versed in all the important scriptures: Sobhana Bhatta and Swami Sastri.
After converting them to his school, these scholars became renowned as important
followers of Sripad Madhva. They became famous as Padmanabha Tirtha and
Narahari Tirtha and are regarded as the principle acaryas of the Madhva school
after Madhva himself. Narahari Tirtha is famous for his commentaries on
Madhva's Gita-bhasya and Karma-nirnaya. He was the Prime Minister of Kalinga
between 1271 and 1293. Padmanabha Tirtha wrote commentaries on many of
Madhva's works, including Madhva's Brahma-sutra-bhasya, his Anuvyakhyana,
and his Dasa-prakaranas. He was the first commentator on many of the major
works of Madhvacarya.

[p.152]
After converting Sobhana Bhatta and Swami Sastri, Sripad Madhvacarya
journeyed through Andhrapradesa, Maharastra and Karnataka arrived at last in
Udipi. Upon his return to Udipi from North India, Madhva confronted
Acyutapreksa, who had refused to accept his ideas previously. Now the roles were
reversed; guru became disciple and disciple became guru. Madhva converted
Acyutapreksa from Sankara's Vedanta to the cause of Vaisnavism and accepted
him as a follower.
As a result of Madhva's success in defeating opposing scholars and gurus,
his reputation spread, and enthusiasm grew for his new system of Vedanta
philosophy. As his commentaries on Bhagavad-gita and Vedanta gained wider and
wider acceptance, followers and new converts began to join his camp from all over
India, attracted by his charismatic personality, invincible logic and scriptural
knowledge, and his inspired faith.
While he stayed in Udipi, it was Madhva's regular habit to bathe in the
ocean. One day, he was sitting on the beach absorbed in contemplation upon Sri
Krsna. At that time, he spotted a ship, bound for Dvaraka, that was about to
founder on a sand bar. He signaled the ship to safety, and it was able to safely
approach the shore. The captain of the ship wanted to bestow some present upon
Sri Madhvacarya, and he accepted a large chunk of gopi-candana tilaka. As it was
being presented to the acarya, the large chunk of tilak broke in half, revealing a
huge deity of Krsna. Everyone was astonished to find a Krsna deity within the
block of tilak, but Madhvacarya was not unaccustomed to miracles and accepted it
as the Lord's grace. At that time he composed some beautiful prayers glorifying

[p.153]
Sri Krsna, and soon after that the Deity was installed at the temple in Udipi where
it remains today. The Deity weighed so much that even thirty men had difficulty
moving it. Madhva, however, was superhumanly powerful—it is said that he was
an incarnation of Vayu—and managed to personally carry the Deity to Udipi.
After installing the Deity of Krsna in Udipi, he revised the system of Deity
worship, establishing a strict regimen of ceremonial ritual and proper conduct
among his followers, imposing among other things the rigorous observance of
fasting on Ekadasis.
Having achieved such great success at home, it was time for Madhva to
once more travel afar. He began a second pilgrimage to North India, where he
once again visited Badarikasrama. The Madhva-vijaya, written by the son of one
of Madhva's disciples describes how Madhva used his sharp wits, his knowledge
of many languages such as Turkish and Persian, and his courage to overcome great
obstacles in his preaching. While on his North Indian tour, Madhva and his
disciples arrived at a place in the province of Ganga Pradesh where political
tensions between Hindus and Muslims prevented them from crossing the river.
The Hindus were on one side of the river and the Muslims on the other side. No
one dared cross, and no boat was available. Madhva and his followers, without
regard for the Muslim soldiers who guarded the crossing, swam across the river.
The entire camp was placed under arrest. Madhva himself was taken before the
Muslim King, Sultan Jalal-uddin-Khilji, who demanded an explanation. When
Madhva was finally allowed to speak on his own behalf, he spoke in Persian,
addressing the king at length on devotional theism. Seeing the intensity and

[p.154]
saintly purity of Sripad Madhvacarya, the Sultan's heart was softened. So
impressed was he with Madhva that he wanted to offer him land and money, but
Madhva set the example of renunciation by humbly declining the Sultan's offer.
Where wit would not help, Madhva would sometimes use his superhuman
strength to save a situation. Once his traveling companion and sannyasi disciple
Satya Tirtha was attacked by a fierce Bengal tiger. Fearless, Madhva went to the
rescue. After wrestling the tiger away from Satya Tirtha, he sent it away with its
tail between its legs. Another time, while walking on pilgrimage through a
dangerous part of India, he was attacked by murderous dacoits, but he easily held
them off.
Madhva was a multi-faceted personality who lived a long and healthy life.
He was a natural leader who believed in physical culture as well as intellectual,
moral, and spiritual culture. He took part in many athletic activities, such as
wrestling, swimming, and mountain-climbing, which served him well in the
Himalayas. As he came from a family of brahmanas that had descended from the
warrior brahmana and incarnation of Godhead, Parasurama, he was tall, strong,
and robust. It was reputed that there was no limit to his bodily strenghth. The
Madhva-vijaya records how a strongman named Kadanjari who was said to have
the strength of thirty men once challenged Madhvacarya to a contest of strength.
Madhvacarya placed the big toe of his foot firmly upon the ground and asked
Kadanjari, the famous strongman, to see if he could lift it. Straining with all his
brawn again and again, the mighty Kadanjari was unable to move even the big toe
of Madhvacarya. According to Trivikrama Pandita, Madhvacarya was endowed

[p.155]
with all the thirty-two bodily symptoms of a great personality. He had a deep,
sonorous, and melodic voice and was an expert singer. His recitation of the verses
of Srimad-Bhagavatam was regarded as being especially sweet.
In this way, Madhva traveled extensively throughout the whole of India.
He returned to South India after having visited Badarinatha, Delhi, Kuruksetra,
Benares, and Goa. After this, his travels were mostly limited to those provinces of
South India near Udipi. After Sankaracarya, who had also traveled extensively,
He was the second important Vedanta acarya to travel throughout India, and his
broad preaching campaign had a lasting effect. Gradually, his following grew, as
great personalities from all parts of India accepted him as guru. The Madhvavijaya mentions that he had disciples from many lands, and his present day
followers still include the speakers of eight different languages—Tulu, Kannada,
Konkani, Maratha, Telugu, Southern Saurastri, Bengali, and Hindi.
After returning to Udipi, Madhva once again immersed himself in prolific
literary activity. He wrote commentaries on the ten major Upanisads. He wrote ten
major philosophical treatises, the Dasa-Prakaranas, as well as what many consider
his most important work, the Anu-Vyakhyana. He wrote a summary of
Mahabharata called the Moksa-dharma, and he also commented on SrimadBhagavatam.
Madhvacarya's dedication to the Lord and his deep scholarship made him a
feared and hated enemy of the followers of Sankaracarya, who had a vested
interest in maintaining their position as the only bona fide Vedantists. It has been
said, “Of all the plagues with which mankind is cursed, ecclesiastical tyrrany's the

[p.156]
worst.” The tyrrany of the acaryas of the Srngeri-matha founded by Sankaracarya
led them to attack Sripad Madhva with every means at their disposal. They
employed various means to harass the followers of Madhva. They tried to prove
that Madhva did not come from any authorized disciplic succession. Finally they
challenged Madhva to a debate.
The Sankarites chose as their champion pandita a highly learned scholar
named Pundarika Puri, who was famed for his erudition and expertise in argument.
In the debate with Madhva he was humiliated. In arguing with Madhva Pundarika
was like a schoolboy facing a professor. Aching for vengeance, the defeated
pandita arranged for one of his cohorts, a sannyasi named Padma Tirtha, to steal a
priceless collection of ancient Sanskrit scriptures from the library of Sripad
Madhvacarya. The books were later recovered with the help of King Jayasimha of
Kumla.
After Jayasimha Raja recovered the books of Madhvacarya, an audience
was arranged between the Jayasimha and Madhva. Their meeting was to be
followed by a debate between the king's own court pandita and Madhva. The
pandita, Trivikrama Pandita, a resident of Visnumangala, was the foremost
authority on impersonal Vedanta in the land of Kumla and an expert poet. They
met in the temple of Kudil. At the end of the day's discourse, Trivikrama Pandita
had failed to defeat Madhva, but he refused to surrender. The debate was
continued on the following day. The next day, Trivikrama Pandita used all his
learning, his wit, and his power of argument in an attempt to embarrass Madhva,
but after exhausting himself was again unable to defeat him. This went on for

[p.157]
fifteen days, when Trivikrama Pandita, his intellect spent, his doubts destroyed,
recognized Sri Madhva as his guru. He surrendered to the lotus feet of Sripad
Madhvacarya and was accepted by him as a disciple. Madhva ordered him to write
a commentary on Vedanta. Trivikrama Pandita's commentary is called the Tattvapradipa. His conversion was a turning point in Madhva's preaching mission. After
his conversion, Trivikrama Pandita's own brother and seven other important
scholars took sannyasa from Madhva and became the first directors of the eight
Madvhaite monasteries in Udipi. Trivikrama Pandita's son, Narayanacarya who
later wrote the Madhva-vijaya.
In the final years of Madhva's life, he wrote further commentaries on the
scriptures, including the Nyaya-vivarana, the Karma-nirnaya, the KrsnamrtaMaharnava, and others. By this time, Madhvacarya was growing old. He had
completed what he set out to do. He had preached his message far and wide,
elaborated his philosophical system in numerous commentaries, and had many
trained missionaries who could carry on his work with great energy. He had
written original works of such a profound character that they would continue to
influence devotional theism well into the 20th century. He had established the
worship of Krsna in Udipi and had given sannyasa to expert scholars and veteran
preachers such as Padmanabha Tirtha, Narahari Tirtha, Madhava Tirtha, and
Aksobhya Tirtha, who would succeed him in promoting the philosophical ideals of
pure dualistic theism. As he finished his commentary on the Aitereya Upanisad,
on the verge of his eightieth birthday, Sripad Madhvacarya passed away from this
world and entered the eternal Vaikuntha planets on the ninth day of the full moon

[p.158]
in the month of Magh (corresponding to January-February) in the year 1317.
The essential principles of Sri Madhvacarya's teachings—where they run
parallel to the teachings of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu—have been summarized in
ten points by Baladeva Vidyabhusana in his Prameya-Ratnavali. These ten points
are as follows:
shri madvhah praha vishnum paratamam akhilamnaya vedyam ca cisvam
satyam bhedam ca jivam hari carana jusas tartamyam ca tesham
moksham vishnv-anghri-labham tad-amala-bhajanam tasya hetum pramanam
pratyaksadi trayam cety upadisati hari krsna-caitanya chandra
"Shri Madhvacaharya taught that:
1) Krishna, who is known as Hari is the Supreme Lord, the Absolute.
2) That Supreme Lord may be known through the Vedas.
3) The material world is real.
4) The jivas, or souls, are different from the Supreme Lord.
5) The jivas are by nature servants of the Supreme Lord.
6) There are two categories of jivas: liberated and illusioned.
7) Liberation means attaining the lotus feet of Krishna, that is, entering into an
eternal relationship of service to the Supreme Lord.
8) Pure devotional service is the cause of this relationship.
9) The truth may be known through direct perception, inference, and Vedic
authority. These very principles were taught by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu."

[p.159]
In his Caitanya Caritamrta commentary (CC Madhya 9.245), Sripad
Bhakdivedanta Swami comments: “For further information about Madhvacarya,
one should read Madhva-vijaya by Narayana Acarya.”

Lives of the Saints
Mahesh Pandit

Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami has written: "Mahesa Pandita, the seventh of
the twelve gopalas, was very liberal. In great love of Krsna he danced to the
beating of a kettledrum like a madman."
Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami writes, "The village of Mahesa Pandita, which
is known as Palapada, is situated in the district of Nadia within a forest about one
mile south of the Cakadaha railway station. The Ganges flows nearby. It is said
that formerly Mahesa Pandita lived on the eastern side of Jirata in the village
known as Masipura or Yasipura, and when Masipura merged in the riverbed of the
Ganges, the Deities there were brought fto Palapada, which is situated in the midst
of various villages such as Beledanga, Berigrama, Sukhasagara, Candude and
Manasapota. (There are about fourteen villages, and the entire neghborhood is
known as Pancanagara Paragana.) It is mentioned that Mahesa Pandita joined the
festival performed by Sri Nityananda Prabhu at Panihati. Narottama dasa Thakura
also joined in the festival, and Mahesa Pandita saw him on that occasion. In the
temple of Mahesa Pandita there areDeities of Gaura-Nityananda, Sri Gopinatha,
Sri Madana-Mohana and Radha-Govinda as well as a salagrama-sila."
Mahesa Pandita used to dance in the ecstasy of krsna-prema just like a
madman. In the Gaura-ganodesa-dipika it is written that in vraja-lila he was the
cowherd boy named Sriman Mahabahu. He was an especially close friend of
Nityananda Prabhu, and was present at the festival of yogurt and chipped rice in
Panihati that was held by Nityananda Prabhu. His birthplaced was in what is now
called Cakadaha. According to Bhaktivinoda Thakura, some people say that he
was the younger brother of Sri Jagadisa Pandita from the Yasodara district of West

[p.160]
Bengal. Bhaktivinoda Thakura, on the other hand says that some doubt remains as
to his birthplace, as there is a lack of conclusive evidence on this subject.
The eight wave of the Bhakti-ratnakara observes that when Sri Narottama
dasa Thakura visited Khadadaha he visited Sri Mahesa Pandita and took darsana
of his lotus feet. There the Bhakti-ratnakara points out that Mahesa Pandita was
an extremely exalted soul, a great mahanta. In Caitanya-Bhagavata, Vrndavana
dasa Thakura also refers to him as a great mahanta, and says that Mahesa Pandita
was especially dear to Nityananda Prabhu. Mahesa Pandita passed away on the
13th day of the dark moon in the month Pausa, which corresponds to DecemberJanuary.

Narahari Sarakara Thakura

About four miles west of Katwa, within the Barddhaman district is Shri
Khanda, the birthplace of Narahari Sarakara Thakura. Shri Mukunda Dasa, shri
Madhava Dasa and Shri Narahari Dasa were brothers. Shri Mukunda's son was
Shri Raghunandana Thakura.
Shri Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami mentions the devotees of Shri Khanda
as a major branch of the Chaitanya tree of Krishna-prema (CC Adi 10:78-79):
"The residents of Shri Khanda include Mukunda Dasa, Shri Raghunandana,
Narahari Dasa, Chiranjiva, and Sulochana. All of them together form a major
branch of the Shri Chaitanya tree. As such they were an abode of the Lord's
mercy. This branch produced the fruits and flowers of bhakti in profusion."
Shri Narahari Thakura was connected with many of Mahaprabhu's
pastimes. Narahari Chakravarti Thakura writes in Bhakti Ratnakara: "Shri
Narahari Thakura's glories are wonderful. In Vrindavana he was Madhumati, and
his excellences are boundless." Shri Lochan Dasa Thakura was a dear disciple of
Narahari Sarakara Thakura. In his Chaitanya Mangala he describes his gurudeva
as follows: "Shri Narahari Dasa is my Lord. He has taught me transcendental

[p.161]
knowledge, and I am under his influence in many other ways. His abundant
Krishna-prema saturates his very being; its symptoms are clearly evident in his
body. No one can understand the extent of his devotion and Krishna-prema. In
his former existence in Vrindavana he was known as Madhumati, a dear gopi
friend of Shri Radha who was a storehouse of sweetness. That very sakhi friend of
Shri Radha appeared in the pastimes of Shri Gauranga during the age of Kali as
Narahari. He was a stores house of Radha-Krishna prema."
Shri Bhaktivinoda Thakura has mentioned Narahari Sarakara in his GauraAroti song: "narahari adi kori chamara dulaya, sanjaya mukunda vasughosh adi
gaya." Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura was as great a singer as he was a poet. He
wrote many poems and songs in connection with the pastimes of Shri Gauranga
and Shri Nityananda. He has written a Sanskrit book of songs called Shri
Bhajanamrita. A book of songs called Padakalpataru, describing intense separation
from Shri Gauranga has been attributed to Narahari Sarakara Thakura, as have
some other books.
Almost all of the songs of Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura have been
included in Bhakti Ratnakara by Narahari Chakravarti Thakura. Therefore, it is
sometimes difficult to tell just which parts of Bhakti Ratnakara are the songs of
Narahari Sarakara being quoted by Narahari Chakravarti, and which parts have
been written by Narahari Chakravarti Thakura. By the same token it is hard to say
exactly which songs of Gaura-lila included in Bhakti Ratnakara are written by
Narahari Sarakara Thakura. What complicates this is that both authors bear the
same name and often end a song simply by saying "This song was sung by
Narahari." This has led to a degree of confusion about the specific authorship of
certain parts of the work, although both Naraharis are great devotees and Bhakti
Ratnakara is revered as an authorized Vaishnava scripture describing the lives of
the great Vaishnava saints.
Shrila Lochan Dasa Thakura has written "Before the birth of Shri
Gauranga many different ragas were written by Narahari which sang of Vrajarasa." Before he wrote songs of Gauranga, Narahari Sarakara Thakura composed
many songs glorifying Krishna. Shrila Narahari Thakura passed away on the

[p.162]
Krishna ekadashi (the eleventh day of the dark moon) in the month of Agrahayana.

The Life and Times of
Paramahamsa
Sri Narottama Dasa Thakura

Narottama Dasa Thakura was a lifelong brahmacari. He visited all the holy places
and the was the best of pure devotees. On the banks of the Padmavati river, in the
town of Gopalpura lived King Krsnanda Datta. His older brother was Purusottama
Datta. The wealth and fame of these two brothers was beyond compare. King
Krsnananda's son was Sri Santosa Datta. In the month of Magha, onthe day of
sukla-pancami, Sri Narottama Dasa Thakura took his birth. Seeing many
auspicious omens surrounding the birth of his son, Raja Krsnananda was very
pleased, and gave lavishly in charity to the brahmanas. The brahmanas, seeing all
the auspicious signs surrounding the child's birth, prophesied that the boy was a
highly perfected soul and great personality, by whose influence many people
would be delivered.
Just as a crescent moon gradually becomes full the king's son grew more effulgent
and beautiful with each passing day. His bodily luster was just like molten gold.
His eyes were large and shaped like lotus petals. His arms extended to his knees
and he had a deep navel. All these are the bodily symptoms of a mahapurusa, a
great personality. All the local townspeople used to gather to take darsana of the

[p.163]
beautiful and saintly child. Soon, the boy's anna-prasanna-samskara, or graineating ceremony was held. At that time, in order to insure auspiciousness and a
bright future for his son, King Krsnananda gave much charity.
The king's wife's name was Sri Narayani Devi. Having given birth to such a
wonderful son, she was floating in the ocean of ecstasy. She always kept the boy
close to her and was always concerned for his well-being, caring for him
constantly. The boy was extremely peaceful. Wherever his mother put him, he
would quietly stay put. Within the ladies quarters, the ladies used to nurture and
care for the child with great ecstasy. Gradually the day of his entrance into school
(Hate-Khari) approached. As his schooling went on, everyone was astonished at
his amazing intelligence. Simply by hearing a subject once from his gurus he
would commit it to memory. In only a short time, he mastered the study of
Sanskrit grammar, poetry, rhetoric, and became expert in many different
scriptures. But gradually he saw as useless any knowledge which did not promote
Hari-bhajan, and soon lost interest in everything but Krishna consciousness. He
found that in previous times the learned, who understood what real knowledge is,
left everything, renouncing the world of birth and death, and went off to the forest
in order to worship the Supreme Lord, Hari. Day after day, Narottama began to
think of how he could become free from family life and constantly engage himself
in the Lord's service. He was indifferent to all material enjoyment; where most
children usually like to play, he was uninterested in playing games. At this time,
hearing the glories of Shri Nityananda and Shri Gauranga, from the lotus lips of
the devotees of the Lord, his heart was filled with spiritual joy. As if he had been

[p.164]
given new life, he felt great ecstasy. Within a few days of hearing the wonderful
qualities of Gaura and Nityananda, he began to chant their holy names in japa day
and night. One night the merciful Shri Gaurasundara, surrounded by his eternal
associates appeared to Narottam in a dream and gave him darshan.
After this, in order to understand how to become free from family life, Narottam
das Thakura began to think day and night of how he could go to Vrindavan.
Narottama has prayed, "Hari Hari! kabe haba Vrindavanavasi?" O Hari, when will
I become a resident of Vrindavana? When will I serve the beautiful divine couple
in Vrindavana with tears in my eyes? In this way, Narottama would constantly
sing. Seeing Narottama's indifference to all sense pleasure and his intense
renunciation, King Krishnananda and Narayani Devi began to think about what to
do with him. Seeing that he was not inclined towards family life, and that he
might soon leave home unexpectedly to go to Vrindavan they became very
worried. They employed a guard to watch over him, so that he couldn't leave.
Narottama Das saw that the difficulties involved in escaping were becoming more
impassable than the Himalayas, and thought that he might never be able to go to
Vrindavana and absorb himself in the worship of the holy feet of Sri Gauranga.
Thinking only of how to get the mercy of Shri Gaura-Nityananda, he began to
pray very earnestly for guidance from them. And so it came to pass that some
messengers came from the Ruler of Bengal, informing King Krishnananda that the
ruler of Bengal wanted to meet with him. In order to meet with the Ruler of
Bengal, Raja Krishnananda and his brother Purushottama Datta set out on a long
journey to the court of the Ruler of Bengal.

[p.165]
Narottama took advantage of the moment, thinking it to be a good opportunity to
leave home. At that time, he secretly left his mother and his protectors, turned
towards Vrindavan and began his journey to that holy land. It was on the full
moon day in the month of Kartika that Narottama Thakura left his family behind.
Passing through Bengal in a short time, he soon found himself on the road to
Mathura. All the other pilgrims he would meet were very affectionate toward
Narottama, as they could recognize him as the son of the king. He would
sometimes live by drinking milk and sometimes would eat the roots and fruits as
he went along. His constant hankering to see Vrindavan made his hunger and
thirst go away. As he moved from place to place, he would hear the glories of
Gaura and Nityananda from the mouths of many devotees. In this way he was
always thinking about their lotus feet, constantly absorbed in meditation. As he
walked and walked, he prayed to the lotus feet of Sri Nityananda Prabhu, as he has
written: "ara kabe nitai chand...." "When will Nityananda show his mercy to me
and free me from the world of birth and death? By his mercy one may give up
material enjoyment and purify his mind. In this way, by the mercy of Sri
Nityananda Prabhu, one can attain Vrindavana."
In this way, walking and walking, Narottama das arrived in Mathura and, seeing
the Yamuna, he offered many prayers. Remembering the names of the Six
Goswamis headed by Sri Rupa and Sri Sanatana, he began to weep in ecstasy.
Gradually he came to Vrindavan itself and entered into that holy land. He was
sent by Sri Jiva Goswami to serve the lotus feet of Lokanatha Goswami.
Lokanatha Maharaj was very ancient, and was so deeply agonized by the pain of

[p.166]
separation from Sri Gauranga that it was as if his very life had been taken away.
Narottama offered his obeisances to the lotus feet of Sri Lokanatha and Lokanatha
asked him, "Who are you?" Narottama said, "I am your fallen servant. I wish to
serve your lotus feet." Lokanatha replied, "How can I, who am unable to serve
Gaura-Nityananda, accept any service?"
After this, Narottama Thakura would secretly go in the middle of the night to the
place where Lokanatha Maharaj would pass stool and urine, and cleanse the area,
maintaining everything there very nicely. After a year of serving in this way, his
service was recognized by Lokanatha Goswami, and bestowed his mercy upon
Narottama Thakura. On the full moon day of the month of Sravana, he initiated
Narottama Thakura as his disciple.
He used to eat by practicing madhukari, and would study the Goswami scriptures
under the guidance of Shri Jiva Goswami. Srinivas Acharya was his dear friend,
and together the two of them used to study under Jiva Goswami. At that time
Shyamananda Prabhu arrived from Gauda-Desh; he also began studying the
Goswami's scriptures under the guidance of Shri Jiva Goswami. These three with
one mind performed their bhajan in Vrindavana and yet still they felt that their
inner aspiration had not attained its complete fulfillment. One day Jiva Gosami
called the three of them to him and said "In the future, you must preach the
message of Sriman Mahaprabhu far and wide. Taking the literatures of the
Goswamis you must quickly go to Bengal and begin preaching."
The three of them gave up their residence in Vrindavana and accepting the order
of their guru on their heads. Taking the treasured scriptures of the Goswamis with

[p.167]
them they started on their journey to Bengal. As continued on their way,
gradually they came to Vanavishnupur. In Vanavishnupur lived a king of dacoits
and thieves named Shri Birhambir. At night he had the scriptures stolen, thinking
them to be treasure of some kind. Awakening in the morning and seeing the
scriptures stolen, the three of them felt as if their heads had been hit by a
thunderbolt. Miserable beyond description, the three of them began seraching the
four directions for the scriptures, until finally news came to them that King
Birhambir had stolen the books and was keeping them hidden in his royal
storehouse. At this, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu headed for Utkala and Narottama
started for Kheturigram, while Shrinivas Acharya stayed behind, thinking to
somehow deliver the Goswami's books from the King's storehouse.
In order to see the holy birthplace of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Narottama went
to quickly visit Nabadwipa. Arriving there, he began chanting "O Gaurahari! O
Gaurahari!" on the banks of the Ganges hundreds and hundreds of times and
offered many prayers to the Lord. Sitting beneath the shade of a Tal tree, he began
to wonder "Where is the actual place of Shri Caitanya's birth?" He sat there for
some time, thinking of what to see next. Just then, an old brahmana happened to
walk by. Narottama rose to his feet to show respect to the brahmana. The
brahmana said, "Baba, from where have you come? What is your name?"
Narottama introduced himself and expressed his desire to see the holy birthplace
of Shri Chaitanya.
The brahmana replied, "Today my life has become auspicious, for before my eyes
is a dear devotee of Shri Chaitanya."

[p.168]
Narottam said, "Baba! You have seen Chaitanya??"
The brahmana replied, "What are you saying! Every day Nimai Pandit sits with his
disciples at this ghat and discusses the shastra, and then, from a distance I watch
him and wonder at the beauty of his divine form. Today I remember seeing that
very form sitting beneath this tree here, where he sits every day." As the brahman
spoke, tears of ecstasy poured from his eyes.
Narottama said, "Baba! It is the fortune of a lifetime that I have beheld you with
these eyes." Saying this, tears fell from his eyes also, and, falling to the ground,
Narottama touched the brahmana's feet to his head.
The brahman said, "Baba! I give you my blessings that soon you will attain
devotion to the lotus feet of Govinda. At that time, you will preach the glories of
Gaura-Govinda far and wide."
After this, the brahmana showed Narottam Das the path to where the house of
Jagannatha Mishra was. Finding that path, Shri Narottama walked until he came
to the house of Jagannatha Mishra. Ariving at the house of Jagannatha Mishra, he
fell down at the door with tears in his eyes and offered his full obeisances, while
reciting various prayers in glorification of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Entering
within the house he had darshan of the lotus feet of Shuklambara Brahmacari.
Narottama offered his respects to his feet. From different signs, Suklambara
Cakravarti could understand that Narottam was an agent of Sri Chaitanya's mercy.
He asked, "Who are you?"
Narottama introduced himself, explaining that he had been living in Vrindavana
under the care of Jiva Goswsami and Lokanatha Goswami, and that he had just

[p.169]
arrived in Nabadwipa. Shri Lokanatha said, "Baba, you have come from
Vrindavan? You were with Lokanatha and Jiva Goswami?" At length, he made
Narottama rise, and embraced him heartily, barraging him with endless questions
about the well-being, activities, and good health of the Goswamis. In this way he
talked on and on with Narottama, as he wanted to hear all about Vrindavana and
everything that was going on there. Finally, Narottama got to meet Ishan Thakura,
the old servant of Shri Shacimata, and upon meeting him, he offered his prayers of
respect at his holy feet and introduced himself. Shri Ishan Thakura touched
Narottama's head, bestowing his blessings upon him, and then embraced him
affectionately. After this, Narottama met Shri Damodara Pandit and offered his
respects to him. After this, narottama went to the house of Shrivas Pandit and
offered his respects to Shripati and Shrinidhi Pandit. All of them affectionately
embraced Narottama. After staying for a few days in Mayapura, Narottama went
to visit the house of Advaita in Shantipura. There he offered his respects at the
lotus feet of Acyutananda. Acyutananda introduced himself and inquired after the
health and wellbeing of the Vrindavan Goswamis.
After staying in Shantipura for two days, he went on to Ambika Kalna to
the house of Gauridas Pandit. At that time, Shri Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu was
staying there. He was the disciple of Gauridas Pandit. Shri Narottama offered his
respects to Hridaya Chaitanya. The two of them affectionately embraced and
Narottam gave him news of the activities of the Goswamis in Vrindavan. After
staying in Ambika Kalna for a day, he went on to the place where the Ganges,
Yamuna, and Saraswati meet—a village called Saptagram. In that place

[p.170]
Uddharana Datta Thakura lived. Shri Nityananda Prabhu had previously given his
mercy to the residents of Saptagram, and so all the people there were great
devotees. After the disappearance of Uddharana Datta Thakura, the people in the
village felt like they had lost their vision. Shri Narottama went to the house of
Uddharana Datta Thakura and there, he found that the devotees were absorbed in
separation from their guru, in great agony passing their days. Narottama Das
offered his respects to all the Vaishnavas there and continued on his way to
Kharadaha Gram.
In Kharadaha Gram Shri Nityananda Prabhu had a residence where his two
energies, Shri Vasudha and Jahnava Devi lived. Shri Narottama went to the house
of Nityananda and remembering the sublime holy name of Nityananda his voice
choked up in ecstasy. Shri Parameshvari Das Thakura took Shri Narottama within
the inner portion of the house reserved for women and brought him to the lotus
feet of Shri Jahnava Mata and Shri Vasudha. Having been introduced to
Narottama, who they could understand had received the mercy of Lokanatha and
Jiva Goswami, they bestowed their mercy upon him. It is said in the BhaktiRatnakara that Both Vasu, who was the knower of all truths, and Shri Jahnava,
who is the Supreme Mistress, bestowed their incomparable mercy upon
Narottama.
Four days later, Narottama, after having spent much time discussing Krishna-katha
in great ecstasy with Shri Jahnava and Vasu, bade them farewell and left for the
town of Khanakula Krishna-nagara to see the place of Abhiram Gopal Thakura.
Having met him, Narottam offered his respects to the holy feet of Abhiram Gopal.

[p.171]
He was passing his days in the great pain of separation from Shri Caitanya and
Nityananda. He had become extremely internal, barely spending any time in the
plane of external consciousness. Seeeing him in that condition, Narottam wept a
great deal. The Gopinath Deity of Abhiram Thakura was wonderful to see.
Narottam took darshan of the deity and recited many prayers and verses in praise
of the Lord before the deity. The next day, after taking his leave of the house of
Abhiram Gopal, Narottam had some inspiration from within and set out for
Jagannatha Puri.
Constantly absorbed in thinking of the eternal associates of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu, it seemed to Narottama that he reached in Jagannatha Puri in no time
at all. Shri Gopinath Acharya and many other devotees, seeing Narottam on the
path all went out to greet him on the road. In this way, surrounded by devotees, he
arrived in Jagannatha Puri. After Shri Narottama had paid his obeisances at te
lotus feet of Gopinatha Acarya and the Acarya had warmly embraced him,
Gopinath Acarya said, "This very day I was hoping that you might arrive." Soon
Narottam and all the devotees from Vrindavan and Bengal began talking on and
on about Krishna, Gauranga, the Goswamis and many other things. All the
devotees were very happy to have Narottam in their midst, and they took him to
have darshan in the temple of Jagannatha. While taking darshan of Jagannatha,
Baladeva and Subhadra, Narottama offered many fine prayers in their glorification
and bowed down before them again and again.
After this he went to the samadhi of Haridas Thakura and upon arriving there
began to drown in the ocean of Shri Krishna Prema. After this he went to the

[p.172]
house of Gadadhara Pandit, and began to shout at the top of his lungs in a loud
voice, "O life and soul of Gauranga! O Gadadhara!" Thereafter he took darshan of
the Tota Gopinath deity and offered his respects at the lotus feet of Shri Mamu
Goswami Thakur who was at that time engaged in the service of Shri Gopinatha.
Thereafter, Shri Narottama Das Thakura drew near to that part of the Gopinath
deity where it is said that Mahaprabhu entered into, when he disappeared from this
earth by entering into the deity in the presence of his devotees. This is recorded in
Bhakti-Ratnakara: "It is difficult to understand the movements of that crown
jewel of sannyasis, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Upon his disappearance, all of a
sudden the earth became dark. He entered into the Gopinatha mandir and never
came out. In this way he left the visible plane and entered into the invisible plane.
(B.R. 8:357).
Hearing of the disappearance of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Narottama said, "O
Sachinandana, O Gaurahari!" and fell unconscious on the ground. Seeing
Narottama's bewildered state of separation from the Lord, all the devotees began
crying tears of prema. After this, Narottama went to the house of Kashi Mishra,
took darshan of the generous lotus feet of Shri Gopala Guru Goswami and saw the
deities at the Radha-Kanta math. After this he went to the Gundica temple for
darshan, and remembered the Lord's pastimes in the Jagannatha vallabha
gardens.. Then the visited the Narendra Sarovara, and many other places. After a
few days, having experienced great transcendental bliss in the association of the
devotees of Jagannatha Puri, and having visited all the places of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu's pastimes, he took his leave of the devotees and left for Shri

[p.173]
Nrishinghapura. Once there, he went to Shyamananda Prabhu's house. Seeing
Narottama after such a long time, Shyamananda Prabhu was floating in the ocean
of ecstasy. In the ecstasy of Krishna-prema the two of them joyfully embraced one
another.
Shyamananda Prabhu, out of affection kept Narottama in Nrishingapura for many
days, not allowing him to leave. Shri Narottama sanctified the town of
Nrishingapura by drowning everyone there in a nectarine flood of Sankirtan.
Together Shyamananda and Narottama would go on discussing Krishna-katha in
great ecstasy, without any knowledge of whether it was day or night. After some
time, Shri Narottama Thakurs bade farewell to Shri Shyamananda Prabhu and set
out for Gaudadesh.
He quickly came to Shri Khanda. There he offered his respects to the lotus feet of
Shri Narahari Sarkara Thakura and Shri Raghunandana. Shri Narahari Sarakara
Thakura had great affection for Narottama's father, Shri Krishnananda. Offering
his respects to Narottama in return, Narahari blessed him many times, touching
him on the head with his hand. Shri Raghunandana embraced him affectionately.
They asked him to tell them all about the devotees in Jagannatha Puri. In this
way, Narottama went from one place to the next in Shri Khanda, his
transcendental pleasure always increasing. Narottama spent many days in Shri
Khanda in great happiness, performing Sankirtan and dancing in the association of
the devotees there.
Bidding farewell to all the eternal associates of Mahaprabhu in Shri Khanda, he
went on to Kanthak Nagara, to the house of Gadadhara Das Thakura. He fell

[p.174]
before the house of Gadadhara Das, offering his respects, and Gadadhara Das
affectionately embraced him. The Bhakti Ratnakara says, "Seeing Narotttama,
Gadadhara Das embraced him with great affection, wetting his body with tears of
joy." Shri Gadadhara Das Prabhu was passing his days in the pain of separation
from Gaura-Nityananda. Narottama Thakura stayed there for two days, and then
left to see the birthplace of Shri Nityananda Prabhu in the Radadesh. And so,
Narottama went to Ekachakra Gram to visit the holy place of Nityananda's birth.
There, an old brahmana who was affectionately disposed towards Narottama
showed him the different holy places where Nityananda had performed his lila.
Remembering the holy names of Hadai Pandit and Padmavati Devi, Narottama fell
to the ground, his voice choked up with ecstasy. After seeing the holy birthplace
of Nityananda, Narottama started out for Kheturi Gram. As the Bhakti Ratnakara
says, "After inquiring about the way to Kheturi Gram from the local people, he
quickly came to the banks of the Padmavati. Crossing over the Padmavati, he
arrived in Kheturi. Upon his arrival, all the people of the village wanted to be the
first to meet him." Since Narottam had been away for so long, there was a big
welcoming celebration. Hearing of his arrival, the residents of Kheturi Gram all
began making preparations to welcome him. Raja Krishnananda and Shri
Purushottama Datta, the father and uncle of narottama had already passed away,
and had gone back to godhead, to the spiritual world. But Purushottama,
Narottama's uncle had a son whose name was Shri Santosha Datta. After
thepassing of King Krishnananda and Purushottama, he was shown much wealth
and material enjoyment. Santosh. was the foremost of saintly persons in the

[p.175]
village. And when he heard that Narottama Thakura was about to bless that town
with his holy footsteps after such a long time, in order to be the first one to greet
Narottama, he rushed out with the rest of the devotees to wait for him on the road
outside Kheturi Gram.
After some time, Narottama could be seen in the distance. Upon seeing him,
Santosh, after bowing prostrate with full obeisances, went forward with tears of
ecstasy in his eyes, falling on the ground again and again to take the dust of
Narottama's lotus feet. At this, Narottama affectionately embraced Santosh and
asked how he had been faring all this time, asking him many questions about his
health, happiness and well-being.
A few days later, Narottama Thakura initiated Santosh with the Radha-Krishna
mantra. Raja Santosh Datta had previously wanted that a temple to be built and a
deity installed. Now he begged at Narottama Thakura's lotus feet tfor his
permission. Narottama gladly gave his approval. Within
Within a few months, Raja Santosh Datta had seen to it that a large temple was
built. The temple compound included a big storehouse for food, a kirtan hall, a
residence hall and ashram for devotees, a bathing pond, a beautiful flower garden,
and a guest house. On the full moon day of Phalguna on the festival day of
Mahaprabhu's appearance the temple was dedicated and the deities were installed
and a great festival, which can only be compared to the Rajasuya-yajna of
Yudhistira Maharaja in its vast expasiveness began and was celebrated for miles
around. Messengers were sent out for miles around Kheturi Gram, to near and
distant lands, to invite kings, landowners, poets, pandits, Vaishnavas, authors, as

[p.176]
well as many other illustrious guests. Some were sent far and wide to invite the
topmost singers and orators. Preparations were made to install six deities at one
time.

The Great Festival of Kheturi Gram

In Buddharigram, at the house of Govinda Kaviraja, the news came of the
festival. All the devotees there along with Srinivasa Acharya soon set out for an
auspicious visit to the great festival in Kheturi Gram. Within a few days, from
Nrishingapura in Orissa came Shri Shyamananda Prabhu, from Khoradoha came
Shri Jahnava Mata and Shri Parameshvari Das, Krishnadas Sarakhel, Madhava
Acarya, Raghupati Vaidya, Minadekana Rama Das, Murari Caitanya Das, Jnana
Das, Mahidhara, Shri Shankara, Kamala Kara Pippalai, Gauranga Das, Nakari,
Krishna Das, Damodara, Balaram Das, Shri Mukunda, and Shri Vrindavan Das
Thakura. From Shri Khanda came Shri Raghunandana and many other devotees,
from Navadwipa came Shri Pati, Shri Nidhi and others, from Shantipura came
Advaita Acarya Prabhu's son Achutananda , Shri Krishna Mishra, and Shri Gopal
as well as many others. From Ambika Kalna came came Shri Hridaya Chaitanya
Prabhu and many other Vaishnavas. Gradually they all arrived in Kheturi Gram.
King Santosh Datta arranged a colossal boat to carry everyone across the river. On
the other side of the river, he had arranged for palanqins, oxcarts and other
conveyances to carry the devotees into Kheturi Gram. Shrinivas Acharya,
Narottam Thakura, and Raja Santosh, went forward to cordially meet the devotees,

[p.177]
and after showing them all due respect, they offered the devotees flower garlands,
congratulated and welcomed them with great affection. All the devotees were
given separate houses and servants. All those great Vaishnavas, who are the
saviors of the world graced the land of Kheturi Gram with the dust of their lotus
feet, thus making transforming it into a great place of pilgrimage. The Sankirtan
of those great souls created a thunderous sound that filled the heavens.
The gates of the temple and the doors of the houses were all well-decorated with
banana leaves, waterpots, auspicious things like mango leaves, small waterpots
decorated with auspicious signs, different kinds of flowers. All the big gateways
and ornamental arches in the city, as well as all the doors of all the houses were
decorated with colorful auspicious symbols like swastikas and six-pointed stars.
The whole effect was one of unprecedented beauty and enchantment. Just before
the festival stage in different places were mountain of all kinds of earthen pots, all
kinds of silver vessels, and gigantic containers filled with milk, ghee, and
thousands of earthen pots filled with yogurt. All these waterpots, earthen pots,
silver vessels and giant containers as well as giant heaps of vegetables, produce,
and fruit that were to be prepared for the festival combined to give the appearance
of a great and beautiful mountain.
The day before the installation ceremony, the devotees, on the order of Shri
Jahnava Mata, began making the final preparations for the installation of the
Deities on the holy appearance day of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. That evening
they began the preliminary celebratory ceremonies by performing Sankirtan after
Narottama Thakura had first offered chandan and flower garlands to Shri Jahnava

[p.178]
Mata and properly worshiped her. Thereafter all the devotees were decorated with
garlands, and upon the request of Shri Narottama and Shrivinas Acharya, Shri
Raghunandana Thakura sang the mangalacarana, the auspicious invocation. On
and on into the middle of the night they devotees performed Sankirtan in order to
make the atmosphere auspicious for the great festival that was to follow the next
day. After chanting and dancing into the middle of the night the Vaishnavas
finally took rest. Many thousands of people honored maha-prasada that night, on
the eve of the Great Festival of Kheturi Gram.
The next morning, the installation ceremonies and the celebration of Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu's appearance, began with all the Vaishnavas performing MahaSankirtan. Shrinivas Acharya presided over the auspicious abhishek ceremony for
the six deities that were being installed. About an hour before Shrinvas Acharya
was to perform the abhishek, the six deities arrived within the temple. At that
time, the local devotees, as well as those who had come from far away arrived
there. The orators spoke, and the singers sang sweet songs. The expert dancers
performed wonderful dances. The different devotees filled the four directions with
the ecstatic sounds of the holy name of Krishna, and the glories of the Lord. In this
way the four directions were filled with ecstasy.
According to the appropriate rules and regulations of the shastras, Shrinivas
Acharya performed the abhishek ceremony, after which the deities were dressed in
the finest cloth, and decorated with beautiful ornaments. After thi, different kinds
of sweet rice and wonderful vegetable preparations and drinks and thousands of
varieties of foodstuffs were offered to the deities. The six deities, Shri Gauranga,

[p.179]
Shri Vallabhikanta, Shri Krishna, Shri Vrajendramohan, Shri Radha Ramana, and
Shri Radha Kanta, were offered all manner of wonderful preparations of bhoga in
different pots. As the bhoga was offered, kirtan was performed, and then after the
deities were satisfied in taking all the preparations to their heart's content, they
were offered a soothing mouthwash, of Tambula, and then the deities were
decorated with fragrant chandan and garlands. After this there was a great arotik,
during which, in great ecstasy all the devotees performed sankirtan. After
performing kirtan and dancing in great bliss, all the devotees, forgetting their
material bodies fell to the ground offering prostrated dandavats.
After this, Shrinivas Acharya offered the prasadam chandan and garlands to
Jahnava Mata. Thereafter, he gave garlands and chandan to all the devotees
present. Shrinivas, Shri Narottam, and Shri Shyamananda Prabhu distributed all
the sandalwood and garlands to all the devotees present, and when they were
finished, on the order of Jahnava Mata, Shri Nrishinga Chaitanya das decorated
Shrinvas, Shyamananda and Narottama with flower garlands and sandalwood
pulp. Gradually the devotees took their seats in the kirtan hall. Jahanava Mata was
seated on an elevated chair at the front of the hall. At that time, on the order of
Jahnava Mata and Achutananda, Shri Narottam Thakura Mahashaya began to
perform kirtan. Shri Gauranga Das, Shri Gokula Das, and Shri Vallabha Das
responded and Devidas played the mrdanga.
Gauranga Das and the others were the most expert in the assembly gathered in that
town of all the different kinds of singing and kirtan, and understood perfectly the
different classical modulations of voice, performing music by ear, as well as fixed

[p.180]
and unfixed meldodies. The sweet and wonderful kirtan of Narottama Thakura
with its sweet tune and unique style of voice filled the four directions and the
heavens above, causing all the men and women weep to tears of prem, and they
all sported in the waves of the Vaikuntha ocean of ecstasy. At that time, Sri
Gauranga Mahaprabhu, along with his own personal associates appeared there and
joined in the sankirtan. "Who can describe the wealth of happiness felt by the
devotees when, in the midst of their kirtan, appeared the munificent Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Himself. Like a flash of lightning in the midst of a mass of
beautiful clouds, Shri Chaitanya Himself appeared within the crowd of devotees
through divine manifestation." (B.R. 10: 572)
Mahaprabhu appeared in their midst along with Shri Narahari, Shri Mukunda, Shri
Gaouridas Pandit, Shri Advaita Acharya, Nityananda, Madhava Ghosh,
Vasughosh, Govinda Ghosh, Acharya Purandara, Shri Mahesh Shri Shankara,
Shridhara, Shri Jagadish Pandit, Shri Yadunandana, Shri Kashishwara, and many
of the other of the Lord's internal associates. They danced in a large company,
with a cast of thousands, and in their midst, Shri Achyutananda, Shri
Raghunandana, Shri Pati, and Shri Nidhi as well as many others joined together in
the intense devotional ecstasy of that great kirtan of singing and dancing. "How
overwhelmed in ecstasy were Advaita and Nityananda! How wonderful was the a
circle the devotees made around Shri Chaitanya, who danced in its middle.
Shrinivasa Acharya and Narottama Thakura fully understood these pastimes as
the wonderful manifestation of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's causeless mercy! It
was an act of grace shown to Shrinivas Acharya and Narottam Thakura. With this

[p.181]
their satisfaction was comlete. (B.R. 10: 607)
When Mahaprabhu, who is most affectionate to all devotees, appeared with his
own eternal assoicates Shrinivasa Acharya and Narottama Thakura felt complete
joy and satisfaction. After the Sankirtan, Shri Jahnava Mata offered the deities
some red powder which is usually thrown by Hindus at the time of the Holi
festival. After this, upon her order, the devotees began to play with the dye
powder by throwing it all over each other in great joy. Everyone's body was
covered with the red powder as the devotees threw it on each other. In this way,
after the fun they had with the red dye powder, the evening approached and the
time came to celebrate the appearance of Shri Gauranga with an abhishek
ceremony. when the twilight came, the bathing ceremony began and it was
conducted by Shrinivas Acharya, as the devotees sang the abhishek song for
Mahaprabhu's appearance ceremony and celebration.
The song went like this:

phalguna purnima mangalera sima
prakata gokula indu
nadiya nagare prati ghare ghare
uthale anande sindhu
kiba kautuka paraspare
sacidevi bhale putra laiya kole
vilase sutika ghare
balake dehite dhaya caribhite

[p.182]
keha na dharaye dhrti
prahanandha kare ke cine kahare
asamkhya lokera gati
balaka madhuri dechi ankhi bhari
pasare apana deha
narahari kaya sacira tanaya
prakase ki navaneha

"At an auspicious time during the full moon evening of the month of Phalguna,
Krishna, the Lord of Gokula made his appearance within the town of Nadiya as
the ocean of ecstasy rose, flooding every house. At that tim, everyone had great
fun with one another. Sachidevi was healthy and happy as the baby played on her
lap within the house of Jagannatha Suta. Morning, noon, evening, and night
everyone wanted to see the child, to touch him and hold him. Accepting all kinds
of difficulties to get a chance to see the new child, unlimited numbers of people
went to the house of Jagannath Mishra to visit.
Everyone packed their eyes to the brim with the charming vision of that sweet boy
and seeing that beautiful sight, they forgot their own bodies. Narahari says that the
divine appearance of the son of Sachi, Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, in this way
increased everyone's affection and brought their hearts to the point of melting."
Everyone was fully absorbed in the ecstasy of kirtan day and night; no one could
think of anything else. Finally it was time for mangal aroti, and the aroti began.
When the dancing and singing for Mangal aroti was finished, the vaishnavas

[p.183]
offered obeisances to one another and retruned to their kutirs to take their morning
baths. In this way, Shri Jahnava Mata quickly took bath, and in order to cook for
the Deities, she entered the kitchen. Being expert in the science of cooking, Shri
Jahnava Mata, within a short time had prepared various kinds of subjis and other
vegetables dishes, sweets, cakes, and beverages. Shrinivas Acharya performed the
abhishek and the puja and offered the bhoga to the deities.
After the bhoga was offered and the bhoga arotik was finished, all the great souls
present there were seated for taking mahaprasada. Shri Jahnava Mata distributed
prasadam with her own hand to the assembled devotees. A great sound of "Hari
Hari!" filled the air from time to time as the great devotees assembled there
honored prasada. After all the mahants were finished taking prasada, Shri
Jahanava Mata requested Shri Narottama, Shrinivasa and Shyamananda Prabhu to
take prasada. When everyone else was finished, Shri Jahnava Mata herself took
prasada.
Outside the kirtan hall, King Santosh Datta distributed various kinds of
mahaprasada to the full satisfaction of the thousands of people who had arrived
for the festival. When all the friends and relatives of the brahmanas who were
present there, as well as all the unexpected and uninvited guests finally finished
taking prasada, then the King himself took mahaprasada at home with his personal
entourage.
On the second day, Raja Santosha Datta especially requested all the devotees to
cook within their kutirs all different kinds of prasada to be offered as before to the
deities in a great feast.

[p.184]
On the third day, as the devotees in their places began to make preparations to
leave, Raja Santosha Datta with tears in his eyes gave the devotees gold coins,
cloth, different kinds of waterpots, and offered all the devotees his respects. All
the devotees bestowed many blessings upon the king and embraced him with great
affection, before bidding him farewell and beginning their journeys home. Shri
Jahnava Mata, accompanied by her own entourage began her journey to
Vrindavana. Shrinivas Acharya, and Shyamananda Prabhu remained behind in
Kheturi Grama for a few days longer, and then they too left for their own homes,
and bade farewell to Kheturi Gram.
After the great festival in Kheturi, Shrila Narottama Thakur's fame spread to the
four directions. Ram Krishna Acharya and Ganganarayana Cakravarti as well as
many other learned devotees throughout the area soon took shelter of the lotus feet
of Shrila Narottama Thakura.
In the town of Gopal Pur lived a brahmana named Shri Vipradas. One day,
Narottama Thakura suddenly arrived at his home. Vipradas was extremely happy.
He offered him a respectful welcome, offering him a seat and the hospitality of a
humble brahamana, in accordance with Vedic tradition. In the place where
Vipradas had his rice paddy stored a terrifying snake lived. Out of fear of the
snake he didn't dare to go inside that storehouse. Vipradas told Narottama Das of
his fear. Hearing this, Narottama Thakura smiled a little bit. He said, "Think
nothing of it." And when the Thakura opened the door to the storehouse, the
snake had vanished."
When Narottama came out of the storehouse, it could be seen that he had with him

[p.185]
the deities of Vishnupriya and Shri Gaurasundara on his lap." (B.R. 10: 202)
Everyone saw a great miracle— Out of the storehouse Narottama Thakura
emerged holding deities of Shri Gauranga and Vishnupriya on his lap. Taking
those deities of Shri Gauranga Nityananda with him, Shri Narottam Thakura went
to Kheturi Grama, where he installed them to be worshipped. At present that deity
is found in a place called Gambilat.
The Glories of Narottama

Once when Narottama Thakura passed by the school a learned smarta brahman,
insulted Narottama Thakura in front of his students. Blaspheming him again and
again, he called Narottama Thakura a Shudra. After this offense, all the limbs of
the brahmana began melting away from leprosy. Consumed by his incurable
disease and seeing no hope for recovery the brahmana went to throw himself in the
Ganges and die. That night Durga Devi came to the brahmana in a dream and
said, "You fool. You have considered a great mahabhagavata, a pure devotee, to
be a shudra. Even if you die and take many many millions of births you cannot be
delivered. But if you simply go to him and beg forgiveness at his lotus feet,
everything will be all right."
The next day, in the afternoon, the brahmana went with a piece of cloth tied
around his neck to indicate great humility, and in complete submission, weeping
and weeping, fell before the lotus feet of Narottama Thakur, begging his
forgiveness. Gradually, as a result of his association with Narottama, his leprosy
healed. Narottama Thakura advised him to engage himself in Krishna bhajan.

[p.186]
Gradually he became greatly devoted to Narottama Thakura.
One day, Narottama Thakura and Shri Ramachandra Kaviraja went to eh river
Padmavati to take bath and at that time they saw two young bramahanas herding
many goats and sheep. Narottama Thakura asked the two brahmanas if they were
making their young lives successful by performing hari bhajan. The two young
brahmana boys listened very attentively. Seeing the beautiful divine forms of
Narottama Thakura and Ramachandra Kaviraj, and hearing their sweet words, they
approached the place where they stood on the banks of the river and in a very
humble mood offered their respectful prayers and obeisances. Narottama Thakura
asked them who they were and they introduced themselves, saying, "We come
from the village of Goyasa Gram, and we are the sons of a Zamindar named
Sivananda Acharya. Our names are Harinam and Ramkrishna. At our house, at
present Durga Puja is being conducted, and on the order of our father we are
bringing all these goats and sheep to be slaughtered. Please give us some advice
as to what we should do."
Seeing the humble mood of the two sons of brahmanas, Shri Thakura Mahashaya
smiled sweetly and began to speak as before on the truths of the Bhagavata,
explaining what the Vedas say about how karma-kanda is often performed in the
modes of passion and ignorance, and how those whose minds are contaminated by
the lower modes are candidates for hell. The Vedas explain that the practitioners
of karma receive some piety and as a result go to the heavenly planets for s short
time, but having once gone to heaven for a short time, they fall into the hellish
worlds to suffer. One who, being interested in material enjoyment, is captivated

[p.187]
by the sweet words of the Vedas that promise material enjoyment has his
intelligence covered. Spending his life in material pursuits, such a person
becomes a killer of animals, or a killer of the soul, and after death falls down into
hell. All souls are the energy of Krishna. One who sees the paramatma
everywhere, who is free from violence to others, who has no false ego, and who
always worships the Supreme Lord becomes free from repeated birth and death
and attains the liberated position of divine service at the lotus feet of the Lord."
Hearing these words from the mouth of Shrila Narottama Thakura, the two
brahmana boys fell before his holy feet and said, "Please bless these most fallen
young brahmanas with the dust of your lotus feet." The Thakur then touched his
hand to their heads, saying, "May you attain Krishna-bhakti."
At this, the young brahmana boys set the goats and sheep free, bathed in the
Padma river, and went with Shri Ramachandra Kaviraja and Narottama Thakura to
the temple of Shriman Mahaprabhu. That day, after taking prasada they again
heard from Shri Narottama Thakura and Ramachandra Kaviraja about different
aspects of the absolute truth. The next day, after shaving their heads, the two
young brahmanas took initiation in the Radha-Krishna mantra. Harinam accepted
the mantra from Ramchandra Kaviraja and Ram-Krishna from Narottama
Thakura.
After some time, Shivananda Acharya began searching and searching for
his sons until he found that they had been seen in Kheturi Gram where they were
living as disciples in the ashrama of Narottam Thakura. Shivananda Acharya
could not contain his anger.

[p.188]
A few days later, the two brothers returned home. Their foreheads were
marked with the tilak of a Vaishnava, their throats decorated with tulasi mala, the
twelve parts of their bodies marked with Vishnu tilak, their heads shaved, wearing
the shikha of a devotee of Krishna. Seeing all this Shivananda raged with the hot
fury of an uncontrolled fire. He told them: "O fools! Where does it say in the
shastra that the position of a Vaishnavas is greater than the position of a brahmana
or that by becoming a Vaishnava one is better than a brahmana? You have
neglected Durga for so long, but your life is useless without Durga. Moreover, if
the Vaishnavas make disciples out of brahmanas it will lead to chaos in society;
the brahmanas will lose their position, and if the pandits are defeated, religion will
be destroyed and everything will be lost."
Hearing these these words of their father, the two young brahamana boys spoke as
follows: "On the other hand, that "religion" or "right work" which causes
violence to others, and ends only misery, cannot properly be called religion or
proper activity. Rather it must be called irreligion and wrong activity. O father!
Giving up the worship of Shalagrama narayana, why have you established the
worship of Durga-devi and other demigods? Giving careful thought to the
conclusions surrounding the performance of Shri Narayana bhajana you should
understand the worship of Shiva and Durga to be a useless waste of time.
Shivananda Acharya and smarta pandits there were thus defeated by the
conclusions given by the brahmana boys. Shivananda began to deeply consider:
"If a great pandit were here, he could defeat all this and belittle the position of
Vaishnava dharma by counter-argument and word jugglery. Shivananda Acharaya

[p.189]
brought a great mahapandit from Mithila named Murari. At that time, for the
purpose of having a debate, he called for his sons and told them that he wanted
them to explain before a public assemply their conclusions that a Vaishnava is
better than a brahmana.
Shri Harinam and Shri Rama Krishna remembering the lotus feet of their guru
maharaja explained the siddhanta or conclusions of the Bhagavatam, and the
arguments of the smartas were so utterly cut to pieces that when it was his turn to
speak the great smarta Mahapandit Murari was unable to put forward any
arguments in response. When it was all over, the mahapandit fled the assembly in
great embarrassment with his head held low and accepted the occupation of a
beggar.
That night, as he lay defeated, Shivananda Acharya began to meditate on
Durga Devi. Gradually he fell asleep and Durga Devi appeared to him in a dream.
At that time she said: "O Shivananda! Shri Hari is the master of everyone. He is
the way, the truth and the light. Those whom he covers with ignorance turn to my
worship. And I assure the destruction of those who worship me. Those who aren't
Krishna-minded are demons. On the other hand those who are dear devotees of
Krishna are really dear to me. For your own sake, if you want to become free
from the offenses you have commited and attain auspiciousness, youhad better go
to Narottama Thakura and beg forgiveness from his lotus feet. Otherwise I will
destroy you, you offender of Vaishnavas!" After speaking these words of
chastisement to Shivananda Acharaya, Durga Devi disappeared.
Ganganarayana Chakravarti was a famous and highly learned brahmana

[p.190]
living in Gambhila Gram. He heard from the lips of Narottama Thakura the
siddhanta of the Goswamis with great attention and took shelter of the lotus feet of
Narottama where he later studied very deeply the scriptures of the Goswamis.
There was another brahmana named Jagannatha Acharya who was a
worshipper of Durga. One day in a dream Durga appeared to him and said, "O
you simple brahmana. Go to Narottama Thakur. Take shelter of his lotus feet.
Practice Krishna bhajan and you will achieve the highest good fortune. Krishna is
my master and my guru. Not a blade of grass moves without his wish."
Jagannatha Acharya, after his afternoon bath, went to Kheturi Gram and
offered his dandavats at the lotus feet of Narottama Thakura, explaining all that
Durga had told him in the dream. Hearing this, the Thakura smiled slightly and
said, "You are very fortunate to have attained Krishna's mercy." On an auspicious
day the Thakura initiated him in the Radha-Krishna mantra. Shri Jagannatha
Acharya became a very dear and confidential disciple of Narottam Thakura.
Seeing the glories of Shrila Narottama Thakura, the society of smarta
brahmanas roasted with envy. A large faction of them went to the Raja Nrishinga
and petitioned him for redress. They told him: "Maharaja! If you don't rescue the
brahmanas, your reputation will be ruined and your death will be assured. The
son of Raja Krishnananda Datta, Narottama Thakura, is a shudra—and yet he
dares to make disciples of the brahmanas. If this goes on, we shall all be drowned
like the members of the Yadu dynasty."
Raja Narasingha said, "I shall protect you. But please tell me, what is to be
done?"

[p.191]
The brahmanas said we shall all go to Kheturi Gram along with the great
and famous, the world-conquering scholar Mahadigvijay Pandit Shri Rupa
Narayana and defeat Narottama. With that great pandit as our leader, Narottama
will not be able to say anything. You please assist us in all this."
The king, Raja Nrishingha said, "I myself shall accompany you every step
of the way. In this way, that group of brahmanas along with the great and learned
world-conquering pandit Rupa Narayana began their journey to Kheturi Gram. As
they were traveling on the road someone heard the news and went to Kheturi
Gram where he informed Shrila Ramachandra Kaviraja and Narottama Thakura.
When Shri Ramachandra Kaviraja and Shri Ganganarayana Cakravarti
heard all this, they became very disturbed. Thereafter, after some inquiry, the two
of them came to know that the party of smarta pandits, were about to arrive in the
marketplace of a town called Kumara Pura, and that after resting there for one day,
they would reach Kheturi Gram the following day. Ramchandara and
Ganganarayana quickly went to that marketplace in Kumarpura and the two of
them set up two different shops. Shri Ramchandra Kaviraja set up a stall for
selling clay pots and Ganganarayana Chakravarti set himself up in a stall selling
pan and betel nut.
In this way, along with Raja Narashinga, the smarta pandits arrived in the
marketplace of Kumarpura and set up their camp near the shops. The disciples of
the pandits went to buy some clay pots for cooking with and went to the pottery
shop. The potter (who was Ramchandra Kaviraja) began speaking to them in pure
Sanskrit. The disciples of the pandits began speaking in Sanskrit also, and soon

[p.192]
they began arguing back and forth in Sanskrit and were defeated. In the same way,
when the students went to purchase pan and betel nuts from the shop of the panwalla (Ganganarayana Chakravarti) he spoke to them in pure Sanskrit. They also
began to argue. Gradually their teachers arrived at the place where the argument
was going on and found themselves unable to reply to the arguments of the panwalla and the clay pot walla. Finally the king, Raja Narasingha, arrived on the
scene the great pandit Rupa Narayana. At that time a great uproar of
argumentation filled the four directions. In the presence of the king, the potter and
the pan-walla defeated all the smarta brahmanas, including Rupa Narayana. Raja
Nrishinga made some inquries and came to know that the pan-walla and potter
were disciples of Narottama Das. At that time he said to the pandits when you are
unable to defeat a common, ordinary disciple of Narottama in the matter of
siddhanta, how will you defeat Narottam himself?"
The smarta pandits were silent. Realizing their defeat, they made
preparations to return to their own villages.
That evening, King Raja Narasingha and Shri Rupa Narayana saw
Durgadevi in a dream. She told them, "If you don't accept the shelter of
Narottam'a lotus feet, I will cut you all to pieces with my sharpened sword." The
following morning Raja Narasimgha and Rupa Narayana arrived at the place of
Narottama Thakura. Narottama Thakura received them with great affection and
with all due respect and cordiality, offering them a seat. He said, "I am very
fortuante to have the company of such highly learned and noble personages such
as your good selves."

[p.193]
Raja Narashinga and Rupa Narayana, were overwhelmed at Narottama's polite and
gentle Vaishnva behavior and fell prostrate at his lotus feet begging forgiveness
for their offenses. At length, upon being hearing of the pronouncement that
Durga Devi had given them, Narottama smiled very sweetly. Thereafter, within a
few days, he initiated them in the he initiated them in the Radha Krishna mantra.

The disappearance of Shri Narottam Das Thakura

Shrila Narottama Thakura was constantly absorbed in singing the glories
of Shri Gauranga and Nityananda. Day after day many atheists, agnostics,
offenders, Shiva worshippers, followers of Durga, dry logicians, mental
speculators and karmis were purified by the touch of his holy lotus feet. Taking
the blessings of Narottama, Shri Ramachandra Kaviraja went to Shri Vrindavana
Dhama. After a few months there, he entered into the etneral lila of Shri Radha
and Govinda. This extremely terrible and unbearable news came to Shrinivas
Acharya, and, unable to bear the separation from his dear disciple, he too passed
away from this earth and entered into the eternal pastimes of Radha and Govinda.
Hearing all this terrible news, Shrila Narottama plunged into the ocean of
separation where he began to drown. In the great and unbearable agony of
separation he wrote the song, "ye anilo premadhana." Barely able to keep afloat
inthe ocean of separation, Shrila Narottam Thakura went near banks of the Ganges
in the village called Gambhilaya and entered a temple of Mahaprabhu. Narottam
ordered the devotees to perform kirtan. The devotees began performing

[p.194]
Sankirtan. After Sankirtan, Narottam Thakura went to the river's edge, and with
tears in his eyes took darshan of the Ganges, offering his obeisances again and
again. At that time, he entered the waters of the Ganges. After entering a short
distance into the water he requested all the devotees to fill the four directions with
the loud chanting of the holy name in Sankirtan. At that time, Shri Ramakrishna
Acharya and Shri Ganganarayana Cakravarti began two kirtans in two different
places. In the midst of all this, the Thakura told two of them, "Pour the waters of
the Ganges over my body." Saying this, everyone was immersed in the waves of
Sankirtan. As the kirtan went on they were just ready to take pour Ganges water
over the body of Shri Narottama Thakura, when just at that moment Shrila
Narottama Das Thakura, who was absorbed in chanting the holy name in
Sankirtana, merged into the waters of the Ganges and vanished from worldly
view. His disappearance day is celebrated on the Krishna Panchami day of the
month of Karttika.
In his Prema Bhakti Chandrika, Narottama Thakura has written:
Song One
jaya sanatana rupa prema bhakti rasa kupa
jugala ujjwala rasa tanu
janhara prasade loka pararila saba soka
prakatala kalpa taru jana
prema bhakti riti jata nija granthe su-byakata
kariyachen dui mahashay
jahara srabana haite parananda haya cite

[p.195]
jugala madhura rasaraya
jugala kishora prem, jini laksa bana hema
hena dhana prakashila janra
jaya rupa sanatana deha more sei dhana
se ratana mora gela hara
bhagavata sastra marma nava bidha bhakti dharma
sadai kariba su sebana
anya devashraya nai tomare kahinu bhai
ei bhakta parama bhajan
sadhu shastra guru vakya cittete kariya aikya
satata bhasiba prema majhe
karmi jnani bhakti hina ihare karibe bhina
narottame ei tattwa gaje
Song two
ana katha ana byatha nahi jena jai tatha
tomara carana smriti majhe
abirata abikala tuwa guna kala-kala
gai jena satera samaje
anya brata anya dana nahi karon bastu jnana
anya seba anya deba puja
ha ha krishna bali bali bedera ananda kari
mane ara nahe jena duja
Jibane marane gati radha krishna prana pati

[p.196]
donhara piriti rasa sukhe
jugala bhajaye janra premanande bhase tanra
ei katha rahu mora buke
jugala carana seba ei dana more diba
jugalete manera piriti
jugala kishora rupa kama rati guna bhupa
mane bahu o lila piriti
dasanete trina kari ha ha kishor-kishori
caranabje nibedana kari
braja-raja-suta syama brishabhanu suta nama
shri radhika nama manohari
kanaka-ketaki rai shyama marakata tay
kandarpa darapa karu cura
nata bara shiromani natinira shikarini
dunhun gune dunhun mana jhura
abharana manimaya prati ange abhinaya
tachu paye narottama kahe
diba nisi guna gaya parama ananda paya
mane ei abhilasa hay
"All glories to Sri Sanantan and Rupa Goswami who are fathomless wellsprings of
prema-bhakti-rasa. They personify ujjvala-rasa. They are desire trees whose
mercy frees everyone from pain and sorrow. The books of those two great souls
clearly explain prema-bhakti. Hearing of them will bring one great joy for they

[p.197]
are the ashraya-vigrahas of madhura-rasa. O Rupa and Sanatana, you are endowed
with the greatest wealth of divine love—radha-krishna-prema—which in your
hands is like thousands of cupid's golden arrows. O Rupa and Sanatana, bestow
some of that treasure upon me by piercing my heart with those jeweled arrows.
The essence of Shrimad Bhagavatam is the ninefold path of bhakti. I shall always
follow that path, without taking shelter of any other god. O brothers! Krishnabhakti is the supreme form of bhajan. Making the words of guru, shastra and the
sadhus my mind's only meditation I shall dive and surface in the ocean of Krishnaprema. The karmis and jnanis have no bhakti. Bhakti is different—it is without
any trace of karma, exploitation, or jnana, calculation. Thus sings Narottama of
the truth."
"I have no other topic of discussion but your lotus feet. I worry my mind with
nothing other than the thought of your lotus feet, O Lord. I can speak of nothing
else but your holy qualities in the company of other devotees. I have no other vow
but your service. I have no other object of charity. I am interested in no other
kind of knowledge besides knowing how to please you. I have no other duties. I
worship no other gods before you. Chanting, "O Krishna! O Krishna!" I shall
wander in ecstasy, thinking of nothing other than You. Radha-Krishna are my
goal in life and death and the masters of my breath. Performing my bhajan only for
them I rise and fall in the ocean of prema, divine love. I pray that I may always
maintain this conception within my heart as my highest ideal: Let me serve the
lotus feet of Shri Shri Radha and Govinda. Let my mind be filled with dedication
to their divine forms whose beauty surpasses that of Cupid and Rati. With a straw

[p.198]
between my teeth I fall at their feet and present my humble petition: "O KishoraKishori! O son of King Nanda, Shyamasundara! And O daughter of King
Vrishabhanu, Shri Radhika, you who enchant even Hari, you whose bodily
complexion is the color of a golden lotus. O Krishna, whose bodily color is that of
a blue jewel, whose beauty mocks cupid. O topmost dancer and danseuse, Shri
Krishna and Shri Radha: Please dance within my mind. O you whose beauty
increases the charm of your dazzling ornaments, my only wish is that day and
night, in great ecstasy, I shall go on singing your glories."

Caitanya Bhagavata Adi-lila Chapter Nine

Chapter Summary

This chapter describes the childhood pastimes of Nityananda up to his
twelth year, during which time he re-enacted the divine pastimes of Krsna, Rama,
Vamana, and the other avataras of Vishnu. This chapter also describes his tour of
different holy places which continued until his twentieth year.
On the order of Gaura Krsna, Ananta Deva had already made his
appearance in the village of Ekacakra in Radades. In this way, Nityananda Prabhu

[p.199]
appeared like the moon from the sea of the womb of Padmavati, the wife of Hadai
Oja. And just like the rising moon, he dispelled all the darkness covering the land
of radha by his auspicious appearance. As a child, Nityananda constantly played
with his boyhood friends imitating the pastimes of Krsna.
Once, his friends took the role of the assembly of gods, who were desrious
of petitioning the Lord to relieve the burden of evil oppressing the Earth.
Nityananda Prabhu took with him a child who was dressed as the earth, and
together with the children who acted the roles of the different assembled gods, he
went to the banks of the river Ganges. There he addressed the Lord who rests in
the ocean of milk, Ksirodaksayi Visnu. At that time, one of the children took the
part of Lord Visnu, and hiding unseen by the other children spoke in a grave voice
that all could hear: "I shall surely be born in Goloka Mathura to lighten the burden
of the Earth."
And so Nityananda Prabhu enacted the different pastimes of Krsna that the
Lord performed during the Dvapara age. He enacted the pastimes of the marriage
of Vasudeva and Devaki, the birth of sr¥ Krsna in the prison of Kamsa, the
journey of Vasudeva to Nandagram and how he carried Krsna over the Yamuna
river, as well as his return from Nandagram and how he brought Mahamaya who
had just appeared as the daughter of Yasoda with him.
He enacted the slaying of Putana, the breaking of the cart, Krsna's butter
stealing pastimes, the slaying of the demons, Dhenuka, Agha, and Baka. He also
displayed the pastimes of the pasturing of the cows, the lifting of Govardhan hill,
the stealing of the gopis clothes and the Lord's bestowal of mercy upon the wives

[p.200]
of the sacrificial brahmanas. He performed the pastimes of sending secret advice
to Kamsa in the guise of Narada, the killing of the Kuvalaya elephant and the
wrestlers Canura and Mustika, and the killing of Kamsa.
Nityananda Prabhu also enacted the pastime of Vamanadeva's cheating
Bali of the three worlds, and took the role of Ramachandra. His friends acting the
part of monkey soldiers pretended to build a bridge of floating stones across the
ocean, in imitation of the pastimes of Rama. Once, Nityananda took the part of
Laksman, and, bow in hand, would storm the palace of Sugriva. Once he took the
part of Rama Himself, enacting the pastime of breaking Parasurama's pride. Once,
taking the role of Laksman he pretended to kill Indrajit and then swoon, hit by the
powerful arrows of Ravana, the demon-king.
He would enact the pastime of having the medicine from Gandamadana
Hill brought by Hanuman and would recover from his wounds after receiving the
medicine. Nityananda spent twelve years enacting these kinds of pastimes. At
that time, he went to visit the different holy places in order to purify them from the
sins left behind by the pilgrims who visit them.
He toured the holy places in both Northern and Southern India, on the
pretext of pilgrimage and in this way was occupied until his twentieth year when
he arrived in Nabadwip and met Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In the course of his
wandering through the different holy places, Nityananda Prabhu met Madhavendra
Puri, Isvara Puri, and Brahmananda Puri. Nityananda passed many days enjoying
the ecstasy of krsna-katha in the company of Madhavendra Puri and his disciples.
He then visited Setubandha, Danatirtha, Mayapuri, Avanti, Godavari Jiyura

[p.201]
Nrsmha, Devapari, Trimala, Kurmaksetra and many other holy places.
At last he arrived at Jagannatha Puri, where he took darsan of Jagannatha
Deva and was profoundly moved to ecstasy upon seeing the Deity. From
Jagannatha Puri, he returned again to Mathura. The chapter closes with an
explanation of Lord Nityananda's renunciation.
Lord Nityananda who is identical with the powerful Balarama himself,
manifest during this period his pastimes of preaching the holy name in love of
God. The chapter concludes with a description of greatness of Nityananda
Balarama

TEXT OF CHAPTER

All glories to sr¥ Krsna Caitanya, the ocean of mercy. All glories to
Nityananda Prabhu, the friend of the helpless. All glories to the life and soul of
sr¥ Advaita Candra. All glories to He who is the only shelter of srivasa and
Gadadhara. All glories to Visvambhara, the son of Jagannatha Misra and Sacidevi
who is always beloved by his devotees and followers.
Before the advent of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Ananta deva himself had
appeared on the order of the Lord. He took birth in the Radha Desa to help enact
the divine lila of the Lord. His father's name was Hadai Oja and his mother's
name was Padmavati. He appeared in the village of Ekacakra within the land of
Gauda. From infancy he was sober, highly intelligent and supremely qualified.
The baby boy was millions of times more beautiful than cupid.

[p.202]
From the moment of his birth there appeared within the Radha Desa, allauspicious symptoms. All varieties of famine, poverty, and unhappiness
immediately disappeared. On the day that Sri Gaurachandra made his advent in
Sridhama Nabadwip, Nityanadna Prabhu shouted with joy. The vast universe was
pervaded with the sound of his cries and the whole world became astonished.
Some said, "The thunderbolt has descended to Earth." Many could understand
that the mightly disturbance was the result of some divine power. Some said, "We
know the cause. The master of Gauda has spoken in a voice of thunder. And in
this way, everyone gave their different opinions. But by the power of the illusory
energy of Krsna, no one could recognize the transcendental position of Nityananda
Prabhu.
In this way, keeping his divine nature unmanifest, the supreme Lord,
Nityananda Prabhu delighted in the company of children. In all the games that the
Lord played with the children, Krsna was the center. Indeed, their play was
nothing but the lila of the Lord. Nityananda Prabhu would hold an assembly of
the gods with one of the children acting the part of the Earth presenting the
petition of the demigods to the supreme Lord Visnu. All of them would go along
with the Earth to the banks of the river where together they would pray to the
hidden Lord of the universe, Ksirodaksayi Visnu.
Unseen by all, one of the boys would loudly proclaim from his hiding
place, "I will shortly be born in the cowherd village of Mathura." Another day,
Nityananda Prabhu and his childhood friends would gather in the village to
celebrate the marriage of Vasudeva and Devaki. Once, having made their

[p.203]
playhouse into the prison of Kamsa, he re-enacted the pastime of Krsna's divine
appearance in the dead of night. Nityananda Prabhu built a cowherd settlement
and took Krsna there, deceiving Kamsa by substituting Yogamaya for Krsna
within the prison.
Another time he dressed up one of his childhood friends as Putana, while
another boy, climbing his body pretended to such his breast like the baby Krsna.
Once, having built a cart made of reeds with the help of the children, Nityananda
Prabhu broke it. Nityananda Prabhu would bring his childhood friends to the
house of the local milkman and steal milk and yogurt, following in the footsteps of
Krsna. His friends never left his company, nor would they return to their homes,
but day and night they would play in the company of Nityananda Prabhu.
Nor did their mothers and fathers complain, but all loved Nityananda with
their hearts and souls. He would hold his relatives and friends in affectioanate
embrace. Upon beholding his amazhing childhood pastimes, everyone would say,
"We have never seen such wonderful playing. How is it possible that this child
has learned all these activities of Krsna. One day having made serpents out of the
leaves of trees, he brought the children to a pond. One of the children would enter
the water and float motionless. Nityananda Prabhu would awaken him.
One day he took the children into a grove of palm trees, where they played
at killing the demon Dhenuka and tasting the palm fruits known as tal fruits. He
would often go to the pasturing grounds and there play many different games with
the children. After constructing toy demons and naming them Baka, Agha, and
Vatsa, he would kill them. Nityananda Prabhu would return home with his

[p.204]
childhood in the afternoon, all of them blowing on buffalo horns.
One day he would imitate Krsna's pastime of lifting Govardhana Hill.
Another day after constructing a replica of Vrndavana, he would play there with
his friends. One day he would steal the clothes of the gopis and another day
would visit the wives of the brahmanas engaged in sacrifice. On eof the children
would take the part of Narada Muni and disguising himself with a beard he would
give confidential advice to Kamsa. One day one of the boys dressed as Akrura
and took Krsna and Balarama away from Vrndavana on the order of Kamsa.
Nityananda Prabhu cried in grief, feeling separation from Krsna in the mood of the
gopis. Streams of tears would flow from his eyes in the view of all the children.
Influenced by the illusory energy of Visnu, no one could understand the
transcendental nature of Nityananda Prabhu's divine lila as all the children played
in his company. After building a replica of Mathura, he would roam with the
boys. Some of them would take the position of garland-makers and some would
wear the garlands. Nityananda Prabhu would dress one of them as Kubja and
would become perfumed by her.
One day, upon making a bow, Nityananda Prabhu broke it with a
thundering noise. After killing the elephant Kuvalayapida and the wrestlers
Canura and Mustika, he would knock to the ground and drag away by the hair one
of the boys who had been made to play the role of Kamsa. Having killed Kamsa
he would dance merrily with the children. In this way, Nityananda Prabhu's
pastimes as a boy made all the people of Ekacakra laugh with delight.
Nityananda Prabhu imitated in his pastimes the transcendental activities of

[p.205]
all the avatars of Godhead. One day Nityananda Prabhu played Vamana and
another child played Bali Maharaja. Inthis way, Nityananda Prabhu would
deceive him into giving the three worlds in charity as one of the children, dressed
as an old man, played the role of Sukracarya and forbid the gift. Then, Nityananda
Prabhu as Vamana, after accepting the alms of Bali, placed his lotus feet upon that
boy's head.
One day, Nityananda Prabhu played at constructing a bridge of trees and
stones across the ocean as all the children played the role of monkey soldiers. In
this way he could chop veranda plants and throw them into the water, pretending
they were giant trees as the children would shout Jaya Rama! Jaya Raghunatha!
Victory to Rama! Victory to the Lord of the Raghu dynasty!
The Lord Himself assumes the role of Lasman, and bow in hand, he made
his way to the palace of Sugriva in a fit of anger, saying, " You wretched monkey!
My Lord, Rama, is becoming distressed by your actions. My Lord is waiting on
Malyavan mountain, burdened with grief. And you, O wicked monkey, are busy
making merry with women! If I am to spare your life, then go to Rama as fast as
you can, and offer him your help. "
Another day, in the mood of Laksman, he would chastise Parasurama in
anger, saying, "O brahmana--I can't be held accountable for what happens to you
if you do not flee at once." The children, in their innocence, would take
Nityananda Prabhu's absorption in the mood of Laksman to be nothing more than
childish play. They did have any knowledge of his position as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Some of them would roam about as the five monkeys,

[p.206]
and taking the role of Laksman, Nityananda Prabhu would ask, "Who are you
monkeys who roam the forests? Tell me! I am the servant of Raghunatha!"
They would tell him, "We wander here in fear of Bali. Lead us to Rama!
We accept the dust of your feet upon our heads." Giving them hearty embrace, he
would lead them to his master and bow down before the feet of Rama, falling flat
like a rod. In the role of Laksman, one day Nityananda Prabhu was beaten by
Indrajit. Another day he would play at killing Indrajit. Having made one of the
boys take the role of Vibhisana, he would lead Vibhisana in the presence of Rama
and then install him as the king of Lanka.
Another child would shout, "Lo! Hear I come as Ravana. Beware the shafts
from my bow. Let Laksman protect you if he can." With this, the child playing
the role of Ravana hurled a lotus flower at Nityananda Prabhu, who dropped to the
ground, senseless, in the mood of a defeated Laksman.
Having swooned away, Nityananda Prabhu would not arise. Although the
boys tried in many ways to arouse him in many different ways, Nityananda Prabhu
showed no sign of life in any part of his body. The children all put their hands to
their heads and wept and cried. Hearing their cries Nityananda Prabhu's mother
and father hastened to the spot. Finding no life in their child, both of them fell
upon the ground senseless.
All the people of the village gathered there and gazed upon the scene in
amazement. The children explained everything. Someone from the crowd said, "I
understand the reason for all this. A long time ago, an actor who was playing the
role of Dasaratha gave up his life upon hearing of the exile of Rama to the forest."

[p.207]
Another said, "The boy is only acting his part. As soon as Hanuman brings the
medicine and administers it to him, he will recover.
Of course, Nityananda Prabhu had already explained this to the children.
He had told them, "As soon as I fall down, all of you make a circle around me and
cry. After a short period of time, send away Hanuman. My life will return if the
medicine is applied to my nose." But as soon as the Lord, who was perfectly
playing his role, became unconscious, the children became very much upset. They
completely lost their judgement and no one could remember Nityananda Prabhu's
instruction.
They simply cried and cried, and called out, "O brother: get up!" But the
bystander's remarks made them remember the Lord's advice. So, one of the
children walked off as Hanuman and another child, dressed as a sage stood in his
way. Greeting him with an offer of fruits and roots, the sage said, "Please stay
with me a while, dear friend, and bless my humble retreat. Only by great good
fortune can one attain the company of one like yourself. "
Hanuman replied, "My work is urgent. I must make haste. I cannot stop;
please excuse me but I must say goodbye. You must have heard of Laksman, the
younger brother of Rama. Ravana has struck him unconscious with his sakti
arrow. I must hurry to Gandhamadana mountain. His life may be saved only if I
bring the proper medicine." The child who played the role of Hanuman spoke all
these lines as he was trained by Nityananda Prabhu. Eveyone looked on in
amazement.
At the request of the sage, Hanuman went to a nearby lake to bathe.

[p.208]
Another child caught hold of his feet from under the water. In this way, the child
took the part of a crocodile and pulled Hanuman into the water. The child-actor
playing Hanuman dragged the crocodile to the bank and the defeats him. Then
Hanuman encountered an even more formidable foe.
A child disguised as a Raksasa ran after Hanuman and threatened to eat
him, saying, "You have defeated the crocodile, but now you must defeat me. Who
will revive Laksman if I swallow you alive?" Hanuman answered, "Your Ravana
is a worthless dog. Take to your heels and be gone." Inthis way the two children
fought with each other until they had each other by the hair. They began beating
each other with their fists. After some time, Hanuman defeated the Raksasa.
Finally, the child playing the role of Hanuman made his way to
Gandhamadana mountain. There, some boys dressed as Gandharavas fight with
him for some time, and, after defeating the Gandharvas, Hanuman brought
Gandhamadana mountain away on his head. One of the children, acting as a
doctor, remembering Rama, applied the medicine to the nose of Nityananda
Prabhu, who was playing the part of Laksman. At last, the great Lord, Nityananda
Prabhu regained consciousness and came to his feet.
At this, all the parents and everyone else laughed. Hadai Pandit took the
child into his arms and all the boys were delighted. Everyone asked, "My dear
child, "Where did you learn all these things?" And the Lord would laughingly
answer, "These are all my divine pastimes."
In his early childhood, the Lord's body was delicately fair. No one wanted
to give up embracing him. Everyone loved him more than they loved their own

[p.209]
sons. By the illusory potency of the Lord, no one could recognize him as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. In this way, from his early childhood,
Nityananda Prabhu enjoyed nothing better than rehearsing the pastimes of Krsna.
All the children, giving up their parents and their homes, would constantly
play in the company of Nityananda Prabhu. I offer my humble obeisances
hundreds of times unto the lotus feet of all those boys who thus played with the
Supreme Lord Nityananda Prabhu. In this way, Nityananda Prabhu perfromed his
pastimes, and from infancy, nothing pleased him except the lila of Sri Krsna.
Who has the power to describe the transcendental pastimes of aaAnanta?
They are only revealed through his mercy, of his own accord. And so, Nityananda
Prabhu stayed at home for the first twelve years of his life. At that time he went
on pilgrimage, visiting the different holy places of India. He wandered as a
pilgrim until his twentieth year and at that time he appeared before Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu.
Listen to the account given in this Adi-lila of Caitanya-Bhagavata of the
pilgrimage of Nityananda Prabhu the Supreme Personality of Godhead who is
blasphemed only by wicked and sinful atheists. Nityananda Prabhu delivered the
whole world. He is an unparalleled ocean of mercy. Only by his mercy do I
understand the truth about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Only by his means has the
greatness of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu been proclaimed. Listen to how
Nityananda Prabhu, the best beloved of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, traveled to all
the holy tirthas in India.
The Lord first visited the holy place known as Vakreswara. From there he

[p.210]
traveled all alone to the grove of Vaidyanatha. After visiting Gaya, he went to
Kasi, the seat of Lord Siva, where the current of the Ganges begins to flow
northwards. Nityananda Prabhu became filled with joy at the sight of the Ganges.
At Kasi he bathed in the Ganges, and with an unsatiated thirst drank its sweet
waters. He performed his morning bath at Prayaga in the month of Magha and
from there went to the place of his previous birth in Mathura. Having sported in
the waters of the Yamuna at Visrama-ghata, the Lord wandered about Govardhana
hill in great ecstasy and in this way he walked through all twelve forests of
Vrindavan.
He visited the house of Nanda Maharaja at Gokula, and sitting down at that
holy place, he wept out of emotion. Offering his obeisances to Madana Gopala the
Lord journeyed to Hastinapura, the home of the pandavas and beholding the place
of those great devotees, the Lord shed tears. All those who loved there, being
nondevotees, could not understand. He bowed down, beholding the glories of
Balarama in the city of Hastinapura and in his ecstasy, shouted, "May Balarama,
the holder of the plow, deliver us all."

Then, Nityananda Prabhu went

to Dvaraka where he bathed in the sea in great joy. He went to Siddhapura, the
seat of Kapila, and at the holy place known as the tirtha of the fish, Matsya-tirtha,
distributed large quantities of cooked rice at a great festival. Nityananda Prabhu
visited Siva-Kanchi and Visnu Kanchi and laughed upon seeing the bitter schism
between the followers of Vishnu and the followers of Siva.
He went to Kuruksetra, Priti-daksa, Bindhu-sarovara, Prabasa, and
Sudarsana tirtha, and after paying a visit to the holy tirtha of Trita-kupa, he went

[p.211]
to Nisala and from there to Brahma-tirtha and then to Cakra-tirtha. The Lord
visited Pratisrota which is near the Saraswati of the West. And from there, that
great magnanimous personality, Nityananda Prabhu, travelled to Naimisaranya.
At that time, Nityananda Prabhu went on to the city of Ayodhya and wept
much upon beholding the holy birthplace of Sri Rama. Then he went to the
kingdom of Guhaka, the candala, where Nityananda Prabhu fell unconscious out
of ecstasy. Remembering the devotion of Guhaka-candala, Nityananda Prabhu
was unconscious for three days. In all those forests, where the Supreme Lord
Rama had stopped to spend a few days, Nityananda Prabhu rolled on the ground in
the agony of separation.
He went to the banks of the Sarayu river and bathed in her waters and from
there went to Kausaki and from there to the sacred retreat of Paulastya the sage.
After bathing in all the holy tirthas of the Gomati, Gandhaki and Soma rivers, he
climbed to the summit of Mount Mahendra, and having paid his obeisances there
to Parasurama, he proceeded to Hardwara, where the flow of the Ganges originates
on this Earth. He then visited Pampa, Bhima-rati, and Sapta-Godavari, after
bathing in the Tirthas of Benva and Bhipasa.
The great Nityananda Prabhu then had a view of Karttika and went to the
mountain of Sri, where Siva and Parvati dwell. In the forms of a brahmana and
his wife, Siva and Parvati resided on the top of the mountain known as Sri. Both
of them recognized their own cherished Deity, Nityananda Prabhu, who had thus
journeyed to the holy places disguised as an avadhuta. Both of them rejoiced upon
beholding their guest, and the goddess Parvati herself, with her own hands,

[p.212]
joyfully cooked prasadam for Nityananda Prabhu. As Siva and Parvati made
offerings of food to Nityananda Prabhu with great regard, he smiled and offered
his obeisances to both of them.
The confidential talks which they held between one another can be
understood only by Krsna Himself. Taking his leave, Nityananda Prabhu went to
Dravida. After visiting Vyenkattanatha, Kamakosti-puri, and Kanch, he arrived at
the famed stream of the Kaveri and from there went to the holy place of Sri
Rangam, where he stayed for some time. From there he went to Hari-ksetra, and
then visited Mount Rsabha. Then he travelled to South Matura, Krtamala,
Tamraparni, and then journeyed northward to the Yamuna, where he visited the
home of Augustya on Malaya mountain.
The people there were filled with great joy on beholding the magnanimous
Nityananda Prabhu who accepted their hospitality, and from there with great
pleasure, he travelled to Badarikasrama. Nityananda Prabhu stayed for some time
at the abode of Naranarayana Rshik and passed his time in complete seclusion.
From there he journeyed to the residence of Vyasa, who recognized Nityananda
Prabhu as the mighty Balaram Himself.
Making himself visible, Vyasa welcomed his guest and the Lord offered
his obeisances before Srila Vyasadeva. At that time, Nityananda Prabhu travelled
to the seat of the Buddhists, where the Lord found them sitting together with one
another. He questioned them, but no one replied in answer. Being angered by the
Buddhists, the Lord kicked them on the head. Laughing, the Buddhists fled and
Nityananda Prabhu continued on his pilgrimage undismayed.

[p.213]
At that time, the Lord arrived at the town of Kanyaka, and after visiting
Durga-devi, travelled to the South Indian sea. Thereafter Nityananda Prabhu went
to the town of Sri Ananta and from there to the pond of the five dancing apsaras or
celestial nymphs. The Lord then visited the temple of Siva called Gokarna. He
travelled from door to door over Kerala and Trigartha and after beholding the
honored wife of Dvaipayana, Nityananda Prabhu travelled to Nirbindhya, Payosni,
and tapti, inthe course of his divine activities.
He visited Reva, the town of Mahismati and Malatirtha and then the Lord
turned westwards, journeying by way of Suparakha. Nityananda Prabhu was
devoid of all fear. He was never afraid of anyone, thorughout the whole of his
travels. His body appeared weak, by reason of constant absorption in Krsna
consciousness. Nityananda Prabhu laughed and cried at intervals. Who could
understand his transcendental moods? Such were the travels of Lord Nityananda
Prabhu as he wandered from one place to the next, visiting the holy tirthas.
At that time, quite by accident, he met Madhavendra Puri. The body of
Madhavendra Puri was surcharged with divine love for Sri Krsna. Madhavendra
Puri was accompanied by all his disciples, who were filled with Krsna prema.
Madhavendra Pur¥ tasted no other food besides the mellow qualities of Krsna. The
mellows of Krsna consciousness were his only sustenance. His holy body was the
place of Krsna's pastimes. There can be no greater praise of his love for Krsna
than to say that the great Advaita Acarya Prabhu was the disciple of Madhavendra
Pur¥.
As soon as Nityananda Prabhu beheld Madhavendra Pur¥ he lost external

[p.214]
consciousness, and lay motionless, being overpowered with divine love. As soon
as Madhavendra Pur¥ saw Nityananda Prabhu he also lost external consciousness
and became oblivious of the world around him. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself
declared again and again that Madhavendra Pur¥ is the original teacher of pure
devotion. As Nityananda Prabhu and Madhavendra Pur¥ fainted upon seeing one
another, Isvara Puri and all the other disciples of Madhavendra Pur¥ wept.
After regaining external consciousness, both of them began to embrace one
another, crying tears of ecstasy. The two great teachers rolled on the ground in the
ecstasy of divine love, and, transformed by their jubilation, shouted words of joy
with voices of thunder. Tears of love flowed like rivers from the eyes of those two
great masters. And wet with their tears, the Earth felt blessed. There was no end
to the display of transcendental ecstasy shown by those two great souls whose
bodies shivered as tears flowed from their eyes and their hair stood on end, for
Caitanya Mahaprabhu himself danced within their hearts.
Nityananda Prabhu said, "Today I have obtained the complete fulfillment
of all the pilgrimages that I have ever performed, for today, my eyes have beheld
the holy feet of Madhavendra Puri. My life is glorified by witnessing such divine
love as his. Holding Nityananda Prabhu in a close embrace, Madhavendra Puri,
choked with divine love, could utter no words of reply. And in his joy,
Madhavendra Pur¥ had no wish to release Nityananda Prabhu from his embrace.
Isvara Puri, Brahmananda Puri, and all the other disciples of Madhavendra Pur¥,
felt irresitably attracted to Nityananda Prabhu. Although they had met so many
renounced saints, they could detect no trace of love for Krsna in any of them. And

[p.215]
by meeting those unfortunate and wicked souls, they gaines nothing but grief.
And being aggrieved, they sought refuge in the forests. But now they were
relieved of all their sorrows upon beholding in one another the manifestation of
love for Krsna. For days, Nityananda Prabhu travelled in the company of
Madhavendra Pur¥, delighting in discussing the pastimes of Krsna. Madhavendra
Pur¥'s devotional service is wonderful to speak of. He would faint upon seeing a
blackish cloud. Day and night, intoxicated by love for Krsna, he laughed and
cried, ranted and raved, and shouted in grief just like a drunkard.
And Nityananda Prabhu, intoxicated with the nectar of Govinda's
sweetness, would stagger and stumble. Falling on the ground, he would laugh
heartily. On beholding the wonderful mood of Madhavendra Pur¥ and Nityananda
Prabhu, the brotherhood of disciples constantly chanted the name of Hari.
Intoxicated by the sweet taste of divine love, no one knew when it was day or
night, and time lost all meaning. Who can understand the talks that Nityananda
Prabhu had with Madhavendra Pur¥? Only Krsna knows their meaning.
Madhavendra Pur¥ could not bear to part company with Nityananda Prabhu, but
took delight in his constant association. He said, "Although I have traveled to
many holy tirthas, I could find no divine love of Godhead such as yours
anywhere. Having obtained the company of such a friend as Nityananda Prabhu, I
have realized the mercy of Krsna. Krsna is so kind! Wherever one can get the
association of Nityananda Prabhu, that place is more than Vaikuntha and all the
holy tirthas combined. If one only hears of the devotion of such a devotee as
Nityananda Prabhu, he is sure to attain Sri Krsnacandra. And whoever has the

[p.216]
least bit of aversion to Nityananda Prabhu, can never be loved by Krsna even if he
is a devotee of Krsna.
In this way, Madhavendra Pur¥ gloriifed Nityananda Prabhu day and night
and served him with love and attention. Nityananda Prabhu himself thought of
Madhavendra Pur¥ as his guru and thus engaged, those two great souls were so
absorbed in love of Krsna that they could not tell whether it was day or night. In
this way, after passing some time in the company of Madhavendra Pur¥,
Nityananda Prabhu set out on his journey to the bridge of Rama known as
Setubandha, at the southernmost tip of India.
Madhavendra Pur¥ went off to visit the Sarayu river. Being completely
absorbed in Krsna, neither of them could remember anything of their own physical
bodies. Completely forgetful of their own selves, they passed their days in the
agony of separation from each other and so their life was preserved. For if any
external consciousness had remained, it would have been impossible for them to
survive the agony of separation. Whoever hears this account of Nityananda
Prabhu and Madhavendra Pur¥ with faith and devotion, obtains the treasure of
love for Krsna.
In this way, Nityananda Prabhu wandered about in the ecstasy of divine
love and after some time arrived at Setubandha, the bridge of Rama. After bathing
in the ghat at Dana-tirtha, he went to Ramesvara, and from there, arrived in
Vijayanagar. Having visited Mayapuri, Avanti, and Godavari, the Lord arrived at
the seat of Jiyur-Nrsmhadeva. He visited Trimala, and the sacred shrine of
Kurmanatha. At last he set out to behold Sri Jagannatha-deva, the moon of

[p.217]
Nilacala.
As soon as he entered the city of Lord Jagannatha, the blissful master of
Nilacala, he fainted away upon beholding the sight of the Lord's cakra. He took
darsan of Jagannatha, seeing his fourfold form as the Caturvyuha fully manifest in
all his joyousness with the whole body of his servitors. Nityananda Prabhu lost
his consciousness in the ecstasy of that vision, and once recovering, lost it again.
This went on again and again. Nityananda Prabhu experienced shivering,
perspiration, tears of joy falling on the ground, shouting words of ecstasy in a
thunderous voice.
Who can describe the ecstasy of Nityananda Prabhu? After spending some
time in this way in Jagannatha Puri, Nityananda Prabhu resumed his journey and
with great enthusiasm, visited the place where the Ganges meets the ocean. Who
can fully describe all his travels to the different holy places? I have only recorded
a fraction of them, by his mercy. After visiting the holy tirthas in this way,
Nityananda Prabhu returned to Mathura. he took up residence in Vrindavana and
stayed there day and night absorbed in thoughts of Krsna.
He ate nothing, and only now and then would drink some milk if someone
gave it to him without his asking for it. Nityananda Prabhu thought to himself,
"Sri Gauracandra is staying in Nabadwip, but his divine glory is remaining
concealed. As soon as the Lord chooses to manifest his divinity, I shall
immediately go to Nabadwip and fulfill my role in his service. In this way, having
made up his mind, Nityananda Prabhu neither went to Nabadwip, nor left
Mathura, but sported constantly in the waters of the Yamuna and played in the

[p.218]
dust of Vrindavana with the children.
And although Nityananda Prabhu possesses complete potency in all
respects, he abstained from bestowing devotion for Visnu upon anyone. Thinking
for himself that when Lord Gauracandra would manifest himself, then the time
would come for performing the pastime of distributing divine love on the order of
the Lord. By thinking that nothing should be done except by the command of sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, the greatness of the lord's service is not reduced, and so
Nityananda Prabhu awaited the command of the Lord.
Nothing moves without the order of the Supreme Lord, sr¥ Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. And no one can do anything without his sanction, even if he is
Ananta, Brahma, Siva, or any of the gods. The destroyers, rulers, and maintainers
of the universe do their duty only upon the order of Sri Caitanya. Those sinners
who are aggrieved in their minds by this, are completely unfit to be seen by a
Vaishnava. The three worlds are witness to the fact that everyone obtained the
treausre of love of god by the mercy of Nityananda Prabhu. He is the first of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees. His tongue treasures the glorious praise of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
Nityananda Prabhu discourses on Caitanya night and day; by serving him,
devotion to Sri Caitanya is obtained. All glories to Nityananda Prabhu the
primeval Lord, by whose mercy we can understand the glories of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Attachment to Nityananda Prabhu is the gift of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's mercy. For one who knows Nityananda Prabhu there is no danger
anywhere. If someone wishes to cross beyond this world of darkness and dive into

[p.219]
the ocean of devotion, let him serve the moonlike Nityananda. Some say that
Nityananda Prabhu is Balarama Himself. others say that he is the abode of divine
love for Sri Caitanya; let them say whatever they like. Whether Nityananda
Prabhu is an ascetic, a devotee, or a sage; whatever he may be in relationship to
Sri Caitanya, may his lotus feet be implanted firmly within the hearts of everyone.
If after hearing all the good qualities of Nityananda Prabhu, there is still a sinful
soul left who doesn't appreciate him or who wants to slander him or blaspheme
him in any way, then I kick on his face with my left foot.
Certain followers of Sri Caitanya speak of Nityananda Prabhu in such a
way that although they appear to speak ill of him, they are really praising him.
Such exalted Vaishnavas [like Advaita Acarya] are always pure in heart and
transcendentally honest. Their seeming disagreement and quarrel is simply lila or
sport. If one looks at their disagreement externally and takes the side of one,
slandering the other, he will be finished. By followsing only those who deprecate
all slander of Nityananda, Sri Caitanya is attained. When will that day be mine
when I shall obtain the divine vision of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and Nityananda
Prabhu, surrounded by the assembly of devotees? May Nityananda Prabhu be my
eternal master in every way. Remaining loyal to Nityananda Prabhu, may I serve
the holy feet of Sri Gauracandra. May I read the holy Bhagavata at the feet of
Nityananda Prabhu birth after birth.
This is my aspiration. All glories to the Supreme Lord, Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. You gave us Nityananda Prabhu and you took him away from us.
And yet, O Mahaprabhu, grant me this one favor--that my mind may remain

[p.220]
always attached to you and to Nityananda Prabhu. He is your greatest devotee;
without your consent, no one can attain his lotus feet. Nityananda Prabhu roamed
throughout Vrndavana and different holy places until Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
manifest his divinity. Whoever listens to this account of the pilgrimages of
Nityananda Prabhu attains the treasure of divine love. Sri Krsna Caitanya is the
life and soul of Nityananda Prabhu. Vrindavan Das, praying at their lotus feet
sings Sri Caitanya Bhagavata.

HERE ENDS THE NINTH CHAPTER OF SRI CAITANYA BHAGAVATA
ADI LILA ENTITLED THE NARRATION OF THE CHILDHOOD PASTIMES
OF NITYANANDA PRABHU AND HIS PILGRIMAGE TO THE HOLY
PLACES.

Lives of the Saints
Purushottama dasa Thakura

From the time he was a small boy, Purusottama dasa Thakura was
dedicated to constantly meditating on the lotus feet of Sri Nityananda Prabhu. In
Caitanya-Caritamrta (C.C. adi 11.38—39), Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami has
written: “The twenty-third and twenty fourth prominent devotees of Nityananda
Prabhu were Sadasiva Kaviraja and his son Purusottama dasa, who was the tenth
gopala. Since birth, Purusottama dasa Thakura was merged in the service of the

[p.221]
lotus feet of Lord Nityananda Prabhu, and he always engaged in childish play with
Lord Krsna.” The Caitanya-Bhagavata records (C.B. Antya 5.741—742):
“Sadasiva Kaviraja was greatly fortunate. His son was named Sri Purusottama
dasa. Purusottama dasa Thakura had no concern for his external body; Sri
Nityananda Prabhu always resided within the core of his heart.
Sri Bhaktivedanta Swami writes: “Sadasiva Kaviraja and Nagara
Purusottama, who were father and son, are described in the Caitanya-Bhagavata as
maha-bhagyavan, greatly fortunate. They belonged to the vaidya caste of
physicians. The Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, verse 156, says that Candravali, a most
beloved gopi of Krsna, later took birth as Sadasiva Kaviraja were great devotees
of Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Purusottama dasa Thakura sometimes lived at
Sukhasagara, near the Cakadaha and Simurali railway stations. All the Deities
installed by Purusottama Thakura were formerly situated in Beledanga-grama, but
when the temple was destroyed, the Deities were brought to Sukhasagara. When
that temple merged inthe bed of the Ganges, the Deities were brought with
Jahnava-mata's Deity to Sahebasanga Bedigrama. Since that place also has been
destroyed, all the Deities are now situated in the village named Candudegrama,
which is situated one mile up from Palapada, as referred to above.”
Kaviraja Goswami remarks about the son of Purusottama dasa Thakura,
“Sri Kanu Thakura, a very respectable gentleman, was the son of Purusottama
dasa Thakura. He was such a great devotee that Lord Krsna always liked in his
body.”
Sri Purusottama dasa Thakura had three principle disciples: Sri

[p.222]
Madhvacarya, Sri Yadavacarya, and Devakinandana dasa. They were from
brahmana families. Sri Madhvacarya later became the husband of Nityananda
Prabhu's daughter Gangadevi. Sri Devakinandana dasa was the author of an
important book glorifying the lives of different Vaisnavas.
Purusottama dasa Thakura's wife's name was Jahnava. She passed away
just after bearing Purusottama dasa Thakura's son Kanu. Hearing this news,
Nityananda Prabhu went to the house of Purusottama dasa Thakura and took his
son Kanu with him to his own village of Khadadaha. Kanu Thakura was born on
the ratha-yatra day in the year 1450 Saka era. Seeing his great devotion,
Nityananda Prabhu gave him the name Sisu Krsnadasa.
When he was five years old, Kanu Thakura was taken to Vrndavana by
Jahnava Mata. Upon seeing the great devotion of the boy, Jiva Goswami and the
other Goswami's called him Kanai Thakura. The people say that one day Kanai
Thakura was in Vrndavana, dancing in the ecstasy of kirtana and while dancing, a
bangle fell from his feet. At that time he said, “At the place where this bangle has
fallen I shall make my residence.” At present that bangle is kept in a temple in a
village called Khana grama in the Yasohara district of Bengal, which is where the
original family home of Kanai Thakura was located
The book called Prema-vilasa observes that Kanai Thakura was present at
the great festival of Kheturi-grama with Sri Jahnava Mata. Just as his father
Purusottama dasa Thakura had accepted many disciples from brahmana families,
so also did Kanai Thakura.

[p.223]
Shri Raghunandana Thakura

Shri Mukunda Dasa, Shri Madhava Dasa and Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura
were three brothers who lived in Shri Khanda. Shri Mukunda Dasa Thakura's son
was Shri Raghunandan Thakura. Mukunda Dasa Thakura was the doctor in the
court of the muslim king. He was always absorbed in Krishna, whatever work he
did.
An example of this is found in what happened to Mukunda Dasa one day
when he went to the court of the king to give him some medical advice. The king
was seated on an elevated throne. Mukunda Dasa sat before him, a little lower, on
a half-elevated seat, and began inquiring about his health. At taht time a servant
came with a large peackock fan to fan the king. The sight of peacock feathers
filled Mukunda with a deep memory of Krishna's pastimes. He fainted. When the
king saw Mukunda laying on the ground he was alarmed. He thought, "Is he
dead?" Gradually they managed to bring him back to consciousness. The king
asked him, "What is the nature of your disease?" Shri Mukunda Dasa replied, "I
am not greatly ill." The king asked him the cause of his behavior. Hiding his real
ailment (separation from Krishna) from the king, Mukunda told him that he had
epilepsy and sometimes fainted. He told him, "It is nothing. Don't worry."
Although Mukunda Dasa did his best to hide his devotional sentiments from the
king, the king could understand that Mukunda Dasa was a highly elevated soul, a
perfected being. With great respect he sent Mukunda Dasa home.
Every year Mukunda Dasa, Madhava Dasa and Narahari Sarakara would

[p.224]
go to Jagannatha Puri to take darshan of the holy feet of Shri Chaitanya and to
dance and chant in Rathayatra kirtan. One day, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
affectionately asked Mukunda Dasa, "Mukunda! Betweend you and Raghunandan,
who is the father and who is the son?" Mukunda said, "Raghunandana is my
father. Through him I have found Krishna consciousness, so he is really my
father." The Lord said, "Your judgement is correct. Whoever gives us Krishnabhakti is our guru and our father." The Lord ordered Raghunandana to serve the
deity, without thinking of anything else.
When he was a boy, Raghunandan used to make the deity eat laddu. Shri
Uddhava Dasa has described this subject in a very beautiful way:
prakata shri khandavasa nama shri mukunda das
ghare seva gopinatha jani
gola kon karyanatare seva karibara tare
shri rahunandane daki ani
ghare ache krishna-seva yatna kare khaoyaiba
eta boli mukunda chalila
pitara adesha paiya sevara samagri loiya
gopinather sammukhe aila
shri raghunandana ati vayakrama sishumati
khao bole kandite kandite
krishna se premer vashe na rakhiya avasheshe
sakala khaila alakshita
asiya mukunda dasa kahe balakera pasha

[p.225]
prasada naivedya ano dekhi
shishu kahe vap shuno sakali khailo punah
avashesha kichui na rakhi
shuni aparupa heno vismita hridoye punah
ara dine balake kahiya
seva anumati diya varir bahira hoiya
punah asi rahe lukaiya
shri raghunandana ati hoiya harisha mati
gopinathe laddu diya kare
khao khao bale ghana arddhaka khaite heno
samaye mukunda dekhi dvare
ye khailo rahe heno ara na khaila puna
dekhiya mukunda preme bhora
nandana kariya dole gadgad svare bole
nayane varishe ghana lora
adhyapi shri khandapure ardha laddu ache kare
dekhe yata bhagvyavanta jane
abhinna madana yei shri raghunandana sei
ei uddhava dasa rasa bhane
Shri Raghunandana Thakura made his appearance within this world in Shri
Khanda. In his home he became acquainted with the worship of Shri Gopinatha
from an early age. One day his father, Mukunda Dasa, who was a doctor, had to go
away on medical business. He called Raghunandana to his side. He told

[p.226]
Raghunandana to see to it that their deity was served with great care and attention.
He told him to be sure and feed the deity. At the appointed hour, taking the order
of his father on his head, Raghunandan went to peform the service. He took the
offering of food into the deity. Raghunandan was just a little boy. He told the
deity: "Eat! Eat!" When he saw that the offering appeared untouched, he began to
cry. Not being able to resist the child's intense devotion, Krishna ate everything
on the plate, leaving no remnants.
When Mukunda Dasa returned, he asked the boy, "Bring me the prasada
remnants of the offering you made earlier." The boy said, "Father, listen. I made
the deity eat as you told me to. He left no remnants. He ate everything on his
plate." Mukunda was amazed at what the child was saying. Ordering the boy to
offer food as before, Mukunda hid himself outside the house and watched through
the window. Raghunandana, then, with great delight, offered Gopinatha a laddu.
"Eat! Eat!" he said. The Lord ate half the laddu. Meanwhile, Mukunda, who was
watching from outside, beheld all this in great amazement. He could understand
that since the deity had already eaten once, and had not left any remnants, his
hunger was satisfied. As a result, he could only finish half the laddu.
He embraced his son and held him on his lap. His voice was choked with
divine emotion. Tears poured from his eyes like rain from a thundercloud. It is
said that even today that half a laddu may be seen in Shri Khanda, where it is kept
in one of the temples there.
For the pleasure of that great devotee whose bodily beauty resembles that
of Cupid himself, Uddhava Dasa narrates this story.

[p.227]
The great devotee Shri Abhirama Gopala Thakura and Shri Raghunandan
Thakura once danced together in Krishna prema in the house of a devotee in BoroDangita. Shri Raghunandana Thakura's nupura, or ankle-bracelet, opened while
he was dancing and fell into a pond in Akai-hatta. From that time on, the pond has
been known as Nupura-kunda. It is said that at present, in the town of Akaihatta,
south of Boro-grama that nupura may be seen in a temple maintained by the local
devotees.
According to certain authorities, Shri Raghunandana Thakura was
Kandarpa Manjari. According to others, he was one of Krishna's sons in Dvaraka
whose name was Kandarpa. This is on the basis of Kavi Karnapura's GauraGanodesha-dipika.
Raghunandana Thakura had a son named Kanai Thakura. The descendants
of Raghunandan Thakura's line live today in Shri Khanda. One of the most
famous of them is a person by the name of Panchanana Kaviraja, who was born in
the line of Shri Raghunandana. Raghunandana Thakura was born in the Saka year
1432.
Quoting from Shrila Bhaktivinoda Thakura's commentary on Chaitanya
Charitamrita, Bhaktivedanta Swami writes: "Shri Mukunda dasa was the son of
Narayana dasa and eldest brother of Narahari Sarakara. His second brother's name
was Madhava dasa, and his son was named Raghunandana dasa. Descendents of
Raghunandana dasa still live four miles west of Katwa in the village named Shri
Khanda, where Raghunandana dasa used to live. Raghunandana had one son
named Kanai, who had two sons—Madana Raya, who was a disciple of Narahari

[p.228]
Sarakara Thakura, and Vamshivadana. It is estimated that at least four hundred
men descended in this dynasty. All their names are recorded in the village known
as Shri Khanda. In the Gaura-ganoddesha-dipikca it is stated that the gopi whose
name was Vrindadevi became Mukunda dasa, lived in Shri Khanda village and
was very dear to Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. His wonderful love and devotion for
Krishna are described in the Madhya-lila, Chapter Fifteen of the Chaitanya
Charitamrita. It is stated in the Bhakti-Ratnakara, Chapter Eight, that
Raghunandana used to serve a Deity of Lord Chaitanya Mahaprabhu."
The Lives of the Saints
Raghunatha Bhatta

danda pranama kari bhatta padila carane
prabhu raghunatha bali kaila alingane
"Raghunatha Bhatta fell straight as a rod at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. Then the Lord embraced him, knowing full well who he was."
(Caitanya Caritamrta Antya 13.101)
From Kasidhama, Raghunatha Bhatta traveled on foot to Puri-dhama.
When he arrived in Puri, he went straight to the place of Sriman Mahaprabhu and
offered his respects at the Lord's lotus feet. At that time, the Lord embraced him,
saying "Raghunatha!" Having been embraced by the Lord, Raghunatha Bhatta
found that all his troubles went far away. Raghunatha Bhatta thought to himself, "I
am coming to see the Lord after such a long time; He didn't know that I was
coming. How is it that he is showing me so much affection? He has many
devotees who are very dear to Him. Why should he show such affection for one

[p.229]
such as myself, the lowest of devotees?" And yet, although he considered himself
very low and mean, when Caitanya Mahaprabhu with a laughing, smiling, face
said "Raghunatha!" and embraced him, Raghunatha began crying tears of ecstasy.
With tears in his eyes, he fell at the Lord's feet and, holding them, said, "O most
merciful Lord. In truth, tell me, why are you giving such great consideration to
this humble one?" The Lord said, "Raghunaha! I cannot forget your parent's
affectionate consideration for me around the time of your birth. Every day, with
great affection, they used to feed me."
After this, Caitanya Mahaprabhu introduced Raghunatha Bhatta to all the
devotees. All the devotees were very happy to meet him. On behalf of his parents,
Raghunatha gave regards and affectionate obeisances to all the devotees. He also
gave them news of Candrasekhara and all the other devotees of East Bengal.
Finally the affectionate mother of Raghunatha Bhatta had sent some nice things
for the Lord to eat, Bengali delicacies neatly packed in special bags. When the
Lord saw them, he was very happy and ordered his servant Govinda to carefully
put them away.
Sri Raghunaha Bhatta's father's name was Sri Tapana Misra. In his
grhastha-lila, the Lord once went to East Bengal, to the Padma river, where he
was a visiting professor of grammar. There he met with Tapana Misra and made
his acquaintance. Tapana Misra was an Eastern Bengali and was a pandit in the
sastra. Still, although He had given great consideration to both the practice of
perfection and the perfection of life, he was unable to ascertain their inner
meaning. One night he had a dream, and in his dream a god came before him and
said, "Misra! Don't worry. Sri Nimai Pandita has just arrived near hear. He will
teach you both the practice of perfection and the goal of life. He is not a man
(nara)—he is the Supreme Lord, Nara-Narayana. Although He is the creator of the
universe, he has accepted the form of a man in order to deliver the world." Saying
this, the god disappeared.
The following morning, after finishing his morning duties, Tapana Misra
set out to find Sriman Mahaprabhu. Just then he saw Sri Nimai Pandita sitting on
the bench before his home, His brilliant effulgence illuminating his courtyard as if
the sun had descended before him. His eyes were just like fresh lotuses, and his
fine black hair was beautifully curled and flowing. His strong chest was decorated
with a fine sacred thread and he wore a garment of brilliant yellow. Just as a

[p.230]
shining moon in the midst of many stars illuminating all four directions, his
effulgent form was surrounded by his disciples.
Tapana Misra offered his obeisances to the Lord, falling at his holy feet,
and said, "O most merciful one! I am most fallen. Please be merciful to me." The
Lord smiled affectionately, and offering him a seat, asked Tapana Misra to
introduce himself. Having introduced himself, Tapana Misra inquired from the
Lord about all the truths regarding the practice of perfection and the goal of life.
Mahaprabhu said, "In every millenium the Lord advents himself in order
to deliver the fallen souls and instruct them in the appropriate form of worship for
each age. In Satya-yuga, meditation, in Treta-yuga, sacrifice, in Dvapara-yuga,
deity worship and in Kali-yuga, sankirtana is the process for attaining the ultimate
salvation. In each of the four ages there is a particular process for deliverance. In
the age of Kali, this form of dharma is nama-sankirtana.
In this way, the Lord in his form as a spiritual teacher informed Tapana
Misra about the real welfare for the soul as well as the true position of dharma in
the age of Kali—that is, nama-sankirtana. He explained that apart from the holy
name, nothing else will be fruitful.
He said, "In the age of Kali the sacrifice of the holy name is the essential
principle. Nothing else will be effective in the age of Kali, and therefore there is
no religious principle superior to this. Without the holy name there is no way to
attain perfection in this age. One should completely renounce any tendency to
follow any other path and always take to the chanting of the holy name of Krsna as
follows: 'Hare Krsna Hare Krsna Krsna Krsna Hare Hare Hare Rama Hare Rama
Rama Rama Hare Hare.' By the influence of this mantra you will be able to
understand everything about the means towards perfection and the goal of life,
since there is no difference between the holy name of Krsna and Krsna Himself."
Tapana Misra, upon hearing the the instructions of the Lord offered his
obeisances at the Lord's feet with all his limbs prostrated upon the ground. When
the Lord was about to leave for Nabadwipa, he wanted to accompany the Lord on
His return journey to Nabadwipa. The Lord, however, ordered him, "Soon you
will go to Kasi. There we shall again meet. At that time I shall instruct you further
in all these truths." Saying this, the Lord set out for Nabadwipa." Soon thereafter,
Tapana Misra and his wife left for Kasidhama, which is also called Baranasi or
Benares.

[p.231]
Some years later, out of his mercy for the fallen souls, Mahaprabhu took
sannyasa and went to reside in Jagannatha Puri on the order of his mother. After
staying there for some months, he went through the Jharikhanda forest (presently
known as Choda Nagapura) on his way to Vrndavana and passed through
Kasidhama. At the bathing ghata called Manikarnika he began chanting the holy
name of Hari and exhorted everyone else to do so, saying, "Haribol! Haribol!"
Just at that time, Tapana Misra was taking bath at that very ghata. Hearing
the holy name of Hari being chanted so loudly, he was astonished. It was like
finding an ocean in the middle of a desert to hear the glories of Hari being chanted
in the midst of the capitol of the Mayavadis, Kasidhama. He looked across the
ghata and saw that on the banks of the bathing ghata stood a sannyasi of
unprecedented beauty and stature. His supernatural effulgence illuminated all four
directions. In complete amazement, Tapana Misra thought to himself, "Who is this
great personality? Could it possibly be Nimai Pandit of Nabadwipa? I have heard
that he has taken sannyasa. Could it be him? He got out of the water and looked
more closely. At that time, as he looked across the water, he was certain that it was
indeed Nimai Pandita. He hurried to the place where the Lord stood and offered
his obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord as joy arose within his heart. As he
picked himself up from the ground, he found himself being embraced by Caitanya
Maharabhu. After so many days he had finally met the Lord again.
With great affection, Tapana Misra brought the Lord to his home. There
he washed the Lord's lotus feet and then drank that holy water along with his
family. His ecstasy knew no bounds. He placed his little son Raghunatha at the
lotus feet of the Lord and made him offer obeisances. The Lord took the boy upon
his lap and cradled him there with great affection. Meanwhile, Tapana Misra
quickly made arrangements for cooking, and Balabhadra Bhattacarya cooked. He
made arrangements for the Lord's bath, and when the Lord had finished bathing
and performing his noon duties, the Lord ate. Tapana Misra's little son
Raghunatha massaged the Lord's feet, and the Lord took rest.
Hearing news of the Lord's arrival, Candrasekhara and the Maharasthrian
brahmana, as well as the other devotees came to offer their respects to the Lord's
holy feet. The Lord embraced Candraskhara and then spoke some krsna-katha with
all the devotees present. While he was in Benares, the Lord visited the temples of
Visvesvara and Bindhu-madhava to take darshan. He also visited the

[p.232]
Dasasvamedha-ghata. The Lord stayed at the house of Candrasekhara and dined at
the house of Tapana Misra. Candrasekhara worked as a scribe, copying scriptures
for the panditas of Kasi with his own hand, in a beautiful style of calligraphy. He
was from a family of highly learned brahmanas.
In Benares, the slogans of the impersonalits like "tat tvam asi," and "aham
brahmasmi" as well as the favorite words of the impersonalists—words like
"Brahma," "atma," and "caitanya"—were constantly heard everywhere. No
devotional words could be heard in Benares, and so wherever the Lord went, he
performed sankirtana. One day, the Maharasthrian brahmana submitted a request
at the Lotus feet of the Lord. "O Lord," he said, O Lord! Please deliver this city of
Kasi. I met with the guru of the sannyasis, Prakasananda Saraswati, and three
times I mentioned your name, "Krsna Caitanya." He also said the word "caitanya"
three times, but he was unable to say the word "krsna" at all. The Lord replied,
"Because they are offenders at the lotus feet of Krsna, the holy name of Krsna
never issues forth from their lips. The holy name and form of Krsna are no
different from his very Self. They are one transcendental truth, full in ecstasy and
divine reality." Having thus instructed the devotees in various ways, the Lord set
out once again to continue his long journey to Vrndavana. He would deliver Kasi
with the mercy of Krsna later, on his return journey to Jagannatha Puri. And so
the Lord went to Vrndavana.
After spending some time in Vrndavana wandering about in the ecstasy of
krsna-prema, by and by the Lord returned to Kasi-dhama. One day, he met with
Prakasananda Saraswati himself. Seeing the Lord's uncommon beauty, childlike
humility, his generosity and magnanimity, Prakasananda was astonished. At
length he fell at the Lord's lotus feet. After the conversion of Prakasananda
Saraswati, all the sannyasis there also fell at the Lord's feet and sang his greatness,
as the Lord delivered everyone there with the holy name of Krsna. The flood of
nectar flowing from the holy name soon inundated Kasi, and washed away the
false doctrine of impersonalism along with its followers.
This time the Lord spent ten days in Kasi, and the joy of his devotees and
followers knew no bounds. Tapana Misra, Candrasekhara, and the Maharasthrian
brahmana, as well as the other devotees there felt as if their life had returned, as
again they had the opportunity to render personal service to Sriman Mahaprabhu.
Tapana Misra's son, Raghunatha felt himself supremely fortunate to be able to

[p.233]
serve his Lord and master, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for ten days.
At last, the time came for the Lord to bid farewell to the devotees so that
he might once again set out for Jagannatha Puri. All the devotees were
heartbroken in agony at the prospect of separation from the Lord. Raghunatha
Bhatta, the son of Tapana Misra, fell before the Lord, begging him not to go and
held his lotus feet, weeping again and again. The Lord took the boy upon his lap
and gave him many reassurances, trying to console him. He said, "You must serve
your father and mother here, and by and by, you may come to Puri-dhama and see
me again." Then, after first embracing Tapana Misra and Candrasekhara and
instructing the devotees there in certain truths of Krsna consciousness, Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu bade farewell to Kasi forever, and began his long journey
by foot to Jagannatha Puri.
Within a short time, Sri Raghunaha became expert in Sanskrit grammar,
rhetoric, and poetry. Gradually, he became highly learned in the revealed
scriptures. He continued to serve his mother and father into their old age, as the
years passed. When he came of age, Raghunatha was ordered by his father to go to
Puri-dhama to see Sri Caitanya Maharabhu. Raghunatha's ecstasy had no
boundaries. In service to the Lord, Raghunatha's mother had prepared various
kinds of delicacies to be offered to Him by Raghunatha on behalf of the Misra's.
All these fine delicacies had been carefully packed together in a big sack.
After recieving the orders and blessings of his parents, Raghunatha left
with a servant for Puri. On the road, he met a Rama-bhakta, a devotee of Rama,
who joined him in traveling to Puri. His name was Sri Rama dasa. By birth he was
a Kayastha, that is he took birth in caste of those who work in the service of the
King. He was a highly learned scholar in the interpretation of that great epic, the
Ramayana. Rama dasa bowed down before Raghunatha and took the dust of his
lotus feet. He then snatched the sack of delicacies from Raghunatha's servant and
began to carry it on his head.
Raghunatha said, "You are a learned scholar, and what are doing?" Rama
dasa said, "Bhattaji! I am the lowest of sudras. It will do me some good to serve a
brahmana." Raghunatha replied, "Panditji! Please. I beg of you, let my servant
carry that heavy sack." At this, Rama dasa surrendered the work of carrying the
sack to Raghunatha's servant. On the way to Jagannatha Puri, Raghunatha dasa
discussed many scriptural conclusions with Rama dasa.

[p.234]
Sri Raghunatha Bhatta arrived in Jagannatha Puri and offered his
obeisances at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. At that time the Lord,
greeted him saying, "Raghunatha!" He picked him up from the ground and
embraced him. The Lord inquired about the welfare of Tapana Misra and his wife,
and asked about Candrasekhara as well as all the other devotees in Benares.
Raghunatha dasa related all this to him and told him everything. Sri Rama dasa
was brought to the place of Mahaprabhu. Sri Rama dasa offered his obeisances to
the lotus feet of Sriman Mahaprabhu, but the Lord, who is the Supersoul within all
living beings, detected that Rama dasa was maintaining desires for liberation
within his heart. As a result, the Lord was not affectionate towards him.
The Lord ordered Raghunatha Bhatta to go see the deity of Lord
Jagannatha after bathing in the ocean. Raghunatha went with the other devotees to
the beach, where they all took bath in the ocean and then went to see Lord
Jagannatha. Afterwards, he returned to the Lord's place, and Mahaprabhu ordered
his servant Govinda to give prasada to Raghunatha Bhatta. The Lord took care to
see to Raghunatha's food and lodgings, and there Raghunatha stayed. Raghunatha
would cook for the Lord on a regular basis. He stayed in Jagannatha Puri for eight
months in the service of the Lord and thus experienced great happiness. He
witnessed for himself the ecstatic singing and dancing of the Lord in various
moods of divine ecstasy before the ratha-yatra car of Lord Jagannatha. After some
time, Mahaprabhu ordered him to return to Kasi. He told Raghunatha to see to the
service of his aging father and mother, and explained to him that, as they were
Vaisnavas, they were not to be neglected. Raghunatha Bhatta took this order of
the Lord very seriously, and the Lord began to instruct him on many other points.
He ordered Raghunatha not to marry, and told him to study the sastra. He told him
that after some time he should again return to Jagannatha Puri to see the deity of
Jagannatha.
With this, Mahaprabhu gave him a tulasi garland from his own neck. The
Lord also gave Raghunatha Bhatta some mahaprasada to be distributed among all
the devotees associated with Tapana Misa and Candrasekhara in Kasi. When it
came time to say goodbye, Raghunatha Bhatta's heart ached. He fell at the lotus
feet of Mahaprabhu, offering his prostated obeisances. The Lord helped
Raghunatha to his feet and gave him a hearty embrace, just as before. Bidding
farewell to Mahaprabhu and Jagannatha Puri, Raghunatha Bhatta started on his

[p.235]
way back to Kasi.
Upon his return to Kasi, Raghunatha Bhatta served his parents carefully,
and began studying the Srimad-Bhagavatam in earnest. After some time his
mother and father passed away. Raghunatha, adhering strictly to the orders of Sri
Caitanya, had never married. Without any family responsibilities to burden him
any longer, he went to Jagannatha Puri to the lotus feet of the Lord. When the
Lord again saw Raghunatha after such a long time, he was very happy. Hearing of
the passing away of Tapana Misra and his devoted wife, Caitanya Mahaprabhu
spoke of their great devotion at length, and glorified them. Raghunatha Bhatta was
very happy to once again have the association of the Lord. He remained in Puri
and served Mahaprabhu faithfully for another eight months. One day the Lord
told him, "You must go to Vrndavana. You have much work to do there in
Vrndavana. I must stay here in Puri, for I have been ordered by my mother to do
so. As a result I cannot finish the work I have to do in Vrndavana. It is up to you
to help me finish my work there."
Upon hearing these words from the Lord, Raghunatha Bhatta was
sorrowful at the prospect of having to leave Him again. The Lord explained to
him that in Vrndavana he would meet Rupa and Sanatana Goswami. He was to
study the Srimad-Bhagavatam and related revealed scriptures under their
guidance. On the Lord's order, Raghunatha Bhatta prepared to leave for
Vrndavana. He bid adieu to the Vaisnavas and fell before the lotus feet of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu for the last time. As Mahaprabhu was saying goodbye
to Raghunatha Bhatta, he gave him a long prasada garland and some tambula
mahaprasada and embraced him.
Having bid goodbye, Raghunatha Bhatta set out on the same path to
Vrndavana that once was traversed by the lotus feet of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In
this way, as he walked along the long road to Vrndavana, Raghunatha Bhatta
would hear again and again of how the Lord passed on the same road. He would
hear of the Lord's glories, and how he visited the different holy places and
performed various wonderful activities.
When he finally arrived in Vrndavana, Rupa and Sanatana Goswami were
very happy to see him and affectionately embraced him. All the Goswamis who
stayed in Vrndavana with them were overjoyed to see him. They all accepted him
as their affectionate godbrother. Raghunatha Bhatta was exceptionally blessed

[p.236]
with humility and meekness. It is recorded in Caitanya-Caritamrta that
Raghunatha Bhatta would recite Srimad-Bhagavatam before Rupa and Sanatana
Goswami, and when doing so, he would be overwhelmed with ecstatic love for
Krsna. By the Lord's mercy he would be overcome by all the symptoms of ecstatic
love of Godhead: tears, choking of the voice, and trembling. Overwhelmed in this
way, he would not be able to continue the reading. It is said that his voice was as
sweet as a cuckoo's, and when reading the Bhagavata, he would sing the verses in
many different tunes, or ragas. In this way, his readings were especially sweet to
hear. Raghunatha Bhatta was fully surrendered to the lotus feet of Gauragovinda. Those lotus feet were his life and soul. After some time in Vrndavana,
Raghunatha Bhatta arranged for his disciples to construct a temple for Govinda.
He prepared various ornaments for Govinda, including a flute and shark-shaped
earrings. Raghunatha Bhatta would neither hear nor speak about anything material.
He would simply discuss Krsna and worship the Lord day and night. He would not
listen to blasphemy of a Vaisnava, nor would he listen to talk of a Vaisnava's
misbehavior. He knew only that everyone was engaged in Krsna's service; he did
not understand anything else. When Raghunatha was absorbed in remembering the
Lord, he wouldtake the tulasi garland and the prasada of Jagannatha given him by
Mahaprabhu, bind them together and wear them on his neck.
Regarding the spiritual position of Raghunatha Bhatta, the Gaura-ganodesadipika states, "In the Vrndavana lila of Krsna Raghunatha Bhatta was Sri Raga
Manjari." Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami was born in 1505 A.D. He passed away
from this earth and entered into the transcendental world in 1579 A.D.
Lives of the Saints
Ramanuja
caitradram sambhavam visnor darsana-sthapanotsukam
tundira-mandale sesa-murtim ramanujam bhaje
“I worship Sripad Ramanuja, the incarnation of Ananta, who took birth in
the month of Caitra (April-May) under the sixth lunar mansion in the Tundirades,
and who came upon this earth to establish the philosophy of Sri Visnu.”
Four major schools or sampradayas of Vaisnavism are considered

[p.237]
authorized by Vaisnavas everywhere: the Brahma, Sri, Rudra, and Kumara
Sampradayas. While Gaudiya Vaisnavas follow the disciplic line of Visnu worship
originating with Brahma, Sripad Ramanujacarya is the founder-acarya of the Sri
Sampradaya, the school of Vaisnavism or Visnu worship descending from the
eternal consort of Visnu known as Laksmidevi or Sri. His commentaries on
Vedanta rival those of Sankaracarya, especially in Tamil-speaking South India,
where Sri Vaisnavism is prominent to this day. He propounded the Vedantic
philosophy known as Visistadvaita-vada, or qualified monism. The most famous
among his numerous writings are his commentary on Vedanta (Sri Bhasya), his
commentary on Bhagavad-gita, his Vedanta-Sara, and the Vedartha-Sangraha.
Many biographies of Ramanuja were compiled shortly after his passing,
including the Sanskrit Prappanamrtam of Anantacarya and various Tamil works.
These authorized sources provide quite a detailed portrait of Ramanuja's life and
teachings. Before we consider Ramanuja's importance in the development of
Vaisnava philosophy and practice, however, we must first consider the South
Indian Vaisnava traditions from which Ramanuja came and which influenced him.
THE PREVIOUS ACHARYAS-—
NATHAMUNI
The first prominent acarya of the Sri Vaisnava school to formulate a
systematic theology of devotion was Sri Nathamuni who appeared as the son of a
scholarly South Indian brahmana in the year 908 A.D. Nathamuni was the first
important teacher to bring together the teachings of the Vedic Sanskrit texts and
the ancient Tamil hymns of the Alwars, (South Indian saints who are famous as
incarnations of the divine paraphernalia of Visnu, such as his disc, conch, lotus,
wheel, garland and so on). Nathamuni was responsible for compiling the “Tamil
Vedas.” These were a collection of prayers, devotional songs, and hymns to Visnu
written by the Alwars in the Tamil language. These hymns, known as the
Prabandha, are sung to this day before the deity of Visnu in the templeat Sri
Rangam, the traditional headquarters of the Sri Vaisnavas and the most famous
temple in South India. At the end of his life, Nathamuni was the temple
commander at the Sri Rangam temple.
Nathamuni's son, Isvaramuni, died at an early age while his wife was still
pregnant. Her child, Nathamuni's grandson later became famous as Yamunacarya,
the direct spiritual precursor of Ramanuja himself. After the death of his own

[p.238]
son, Nathamuni took sannyasa. Because of his vast learning, he was given the
name “Muni” and because of his development in yogic perfection, he was famous
as “Yogindra.” His systematic philosophy of Sri Vaisnavism is formulated in his
treatise on logic, nyaya-tattva, and his views on the relationship between bhakti
and mystic yoga are given in his book Yoga-rahasya.
YAMUNACARYA
After Nathamuni, Sri Yamunacarya was the foremost exponent of Sri
Vaisnavism before Ramanuja. Born about 953 A.D. in Madura, the capital of the
kingdom of Pandura, Yamuna was raised by his mother and grandmother, as his
father had passed away and his grandfather, Nathamuni had taken sannyasa.
Although he was an orphan, he did well in his studies and soon surpassed all his
fellow students in scholarship. The academic genius of the young Yamuna
amazed everyone. His attention to his studies and proficiency in the scriptures
endeared him to his teacher, Sri Bhasyacarya and his sweet and beautiful nature
made him the darling of his classmates.
When Yamuna was only twelve, he won a kingdom through the power of
his wits. At that time, the royal pandita of the Pandya king of Cola had succeeded
in making all the other panditas in his country look like fools. He was famous as
“Vidvajjanakolahala” which means “One who throws scholars into an uproar.”
The royal pandita was very dear to the king who patronized him lavishly.
Vidvajjanakolahala used to extract an annual tax from all the panditas in the land.
Those who didn't pay had to face the royal pandita in argument and be humiliated
and subsuquently punished. For fear of losing their reputation as scholars,
everyone used to regularly pay this tax without argument. One day a disciple of
the royal pandita arrived at the asrama of Yamuna's guru demanding the tax.
Yamuna's guru was away at the time and Yamuna himself refused to pay the tax,
considering it to be an insult to his gurudeva. He sent the disciple back with the
message that an insignificant follower of Bhasyacarya would challenge the worldconquering royal pandita, Vidvajjanakolahala in open debate.
When the news of the twelve-year old boy's challenge came to the royal
pandita, he simply laughed. “All right,” he said. “Summon this scholar here and
let us match wits.” By the king's own order a day was set for the debate, and at the
appointed time the boy scholar was brought before the royal court on a lavish
palanquin. Seeing the boy's beauty, the queen was charmed. She instantly took his

[p.239]
side, while the king favored his own pandita. A wager was settled on by the king
and queen. If the king's pandita won the debate, the queen was to submit to the
king's every whim. If the queen's favorite, the beautiful boy pandita, won the
debate, the king was to award Yamunacarya half the kingdom.
First the royal pandita examined the child, asking him many obscure
questions about Sanskrit grammar which Yamuna answered perfectly. Then it was
Yamuna's turn to examine the scholar. He said, “I will state three maxims. If you
can refute them, I shall admit defeat. The first is this: your mother is not barren.”
The royal pandita was dumbfounded. To refute this maxim would be do
deny his own birth. Unable to answer, he stood silent.
Yamunacarya continued: “My second proposal is this: The king is
righteous. Refute this if you dare.”
Again the pandita was silenced. How could he argue that his own king
was impious?
Finally the boy said: “My third proposal is this: The queen is chaste.
Refute this and I am defeated.”
Unable to refute these propositions, the pandita fought back. “You are
proposing things which are irrefutable. By asking me to challenge the piety of the
king and the chastity of the queen you are committing treason and blasphemy.
How dare you ask this of me! This is an outrage. If you think these propositions
can be refuted then refute them yourself and be damned as an offender to the
throne. Otherwise admit your insolence and hang your head in shame.”
The panditas followers filled the arena with applause, and the king felt
confident that his champion had successfully turned back the challenge of this
impudent boy. But Yamunacarya was not finished. “As you wish,” he said. “I
shall refute these propositions myself. First I asked to to refute the proposal that
your mother is not barren. Since you have failed to do so, I must cite the Manu
Smrti on this matter. According to the Laws of Manu, “If a woman has no more
than one child, she may be considered barren.” (eka-putro hy aputrena lokavadat,
Manu-Samhita, 9.61, Medhatithi Bhashya). Since your mother had only one son,
the proposal that she is not barren is refuted.
“Now the second proposal: the king is pious. I asked you to refute this, but
you were unable to do so. The Laws of Manu also state that since he is responsible
for their protection, the king assumes one sixth of the results of the pious or

[p.240]
impious deeds of his subjects. (sarvato dharmasad bhago rajo bhavati raksatah,
adharmadapi sad bhago bhavatyasya hyaraksatah, Manu-Samhita, 8.304,
Medhatithi Bhashya) Since this is Kali-yuga, the people in general are naturally
impious, and so the king must assume a heavy burden of impiety. This refutes the
second thesis: the king is pious.
“As for my refutation to the third proposal—the queen is chaste.” With
this the crowd became quiet. The queen herself blushed. Yamunacarya's
supporters wondered, how the boy could refute this proposition and conquer the
pandita without embarrassing the queen. Yamunacarya continued, “The Laws of
Manu state that a great king is the representative of the gods. The gods—Agni the
fire-god, Vayu the wind-god, Surya the sung-god, Chandra the moon-god, Yama
the lord of death, Varuna, Kuvera, and Indra—are all present in the body of the
king. The queen, therefore is wedded to more than just one man. When a woman
is married to more than one man how then can she be chaste? Thus the third
proposition is refuted.”
The crowd was astonished. The boy scholar had certainly defeated the
royal pandita. The queen was jubilant and embraced Yamunacarya, saying,
“Alabandaru,” meaning “one who conquers.” The court pandita was disgraced.
The king, who had been defeated in his wager with the queen, arose and said, “My
boy, Alabandaru, child-scholar that you are you have defeated my royal pandita,
the terror of scholars—Vidvajjanakolahola himself. His pitiful life is now yours to
do with as you see fit. I commend him into your hands. As for yourself, I
promised the queen to give you half my kingdom upon your victory here. Now
that you have won, I humbly request you to accept half my kingdom as your
reward.” The king awarded to Yamunacarya the place which is now called
alavandara-medu.
Yamunacarya, who had won the title of “conqueror” now became famous
as Alabandaru, the boy-king. As the years passed, he became involved more and
more in the affairs of state, practically forgetting the legacy of his grandfather,
Nathamuni. Surrounded by kingly opulence and royal power, he gradually
became entrenched in the position of a king. Absorbed in politics, he had little
time for spiritual affairs.
About this time, Alabandaru's grandfather, Nathamuni, had passed away,
but before he left this world, he called his most confidential disciple Nambi to his

[p.241]
side and entrusted him with a sacred task: to inspire Yamunacarya to renounce his
kingdom and champion the cause of Sri Vaisnavism. Yamunacarya was uniquely
qualified to propogate Sri Vaisnavism. No one else could take the place of
Nathamuni.
Years passed. Finally the time came to spur Yamunacarya to action.
Nambi, remembering the order of his gurudeva set out to confront Yamunacarya
and convince him of the need to renounce the world and preach. When he arrived
at the palace gates, however, he was turned away. It was not easy for a humble
mendicant to get an interview with the great King Alabandaru. Through inquiry,
Nambi came to know who the royal cook was. One day, while the cook was
returning from the marketplace with fresh produce, Nambi stopped him and gave
him some vegetable greens called tuduvalai, which are supposed to promote
mental purity and increase one's tendency towards contemplation and spiritual life.
He asked to cook to please prepare these greens regularly for the welfare of the
king. The pious cook understood the rarity and purity of these greens and was
pleased to cook them for the king. From that day on, he began regularly preparing
them for the king's lunch. The king very much enjoyed the greens, and Nambi
would regularly supply the cook with them.
One day, Nambi held back. The king missed his greens and asked the cook
why they had not been prepared. When the cook explained about the mysterious
mendicant who supplied these greens, the king's interest was piqued. “The next
time this sadhu comes,” the king ordered his royal cook, “bring him before me.”
The next day, when Nambi returned with the greens, the cook brought him
before the king and introduced him. “What do you want of me?” the king asked.
“Why do you bring these greens every day for no payment?” Nambi requested a
private audience. The king ordered all his attendants to leave them alone, and
when everyone had gone he offered Nambi a seat. “Please speak,” he said.
Nambi then told Alabandaru of his grandfather's passing. He told him of
Sri Nathamuni's anxiety that the sampradaya of Sri Vaisnavism needed a
champion, a great scholar who could defeat opposing schools of philosophy and
establish the religious principles of their tradition. Only Yamunacarya was
qualified enough to do this, but he had now become King Alabandaru, a ruler of
men attached to royal luxury and power. Gradually Nambi awoke in
Yamunacarya's heart a desire to renounce the throne and lead the Sri Sampradaya.

[p.242]
After deeply considering the message of Bhagavad-gita in Nambi's company he
visited the temple of Sri Rangam, where he accepted the mantra from Nambi and
committed himself to giving up the opulence of royalty and taking up the mission
of his grandfather.
After surrendering himself fully to a life of spiritual discipline,
contemplation and devotion, Sri Yamunacarya went on to become a great teacher.
He quickly became the intellectual and spiritual leader of the Sri Vaisnavas, highly
regarded for his realization, his scholarship, and his synthesis of Nathamuni's
system of philosophy with the system of Pancaratra worship ordained by the
Vedas. Yamunacarya's unquestioned status as a brahmana helped him to establish
his Pancaratrik version of Vedanta above the protests of the followers of
Sankaracarya. Thus he increased the prestige of Vaisnavism and Krsna-bhakti by
demonstrating both its scriptural basis and its spiritual superiority to mundane
casteism. Among his writings are the famous devotional prayers to Visnu known
as the Stotra-ratnam, the Jewel of Prayers. His writings also include various
philosophical and theological works: the Gita-sangraha, an explanation of his
views on Bhagavad-gita; his Agama-pramanya, expounding the synthesis of the
Pancaratra tradition with his version of Vaisnava Vedanta; and other important
doctrinal works, such as the Siddhitraya or Threefold Perfection (of which only
fragments survived him) and the Atma-siddhi, or Treatise on Self-realization.
Yamunacarya's principle writings are in Sanskrit. Writing in Sanskrit was
for Yamunacarya somewhat of a strategic departure from the tradition of the South
Indian Alwars, who wrote in Tamil. By writing his scriptural commentaries in
Sanskrit, however, Yamunacarya hoped to establish the South Indian tradition
within a more classic framework of exposition acceptable to a wider range of
Vedic scholars. In this way, he laid the groundwork for Ramanuja to establish Sri
Vaisnavism as an orthodox sampradaya, or major school of theology.
The general outline of Sri Vaisnavism, as well as many of its details were
chalked out by Yamunacarya in his writings. It remained for Ramanuja to fill in
that outline, to etch out its finer details, to establish a more orthodox Sri
Vaisnavism in the collective consciousness of South India, and to build a place in
history for the Sri Vaisnava sampradaya.
Yamunacarya attracted many followers and disciples; history records the
names of only twenty of them. Although they were sincere and devoted to their

[p.243]
beloved gurudeva, none of them were blessed with the deep scholarship or
determined energy required to carry on his great work in a significant way. It was
left to Sri Ramanujacarya to fulfill Yamunacarya's hopes for the future of Sri
Vaisnavism.
Periya Tirumalai Nambi, who is also called Sri Saila Purna in some
accounts, was Yamunacarya's favorite follower. Under the guidance of
Yamunacarya, he accepted the renounced order of life and lived with his guru,
serving him to the very end. Nambi had two sisters, named Bhudevi and Sridevi,
after the two consorts of Lord Sri Venkatesvara. Bhudevi married a pious
brahmana named Asuri Kesavacarya. Kesavacarya lived in Sri Perumudura, about
twenty-six miles from Madras. After some time, a child was born to them. He was
named Laksmana by Nambi, after Laksmana, the brother of Sri Ramacandra.
According to Sri Vaisnavas, Ramanuja was an incarnation of Laksmana himself.
Since Laksman had been a great devotee of Rama the boy soon became known as
Rama-anuja, or “follower of Rama.”
According to Sri Vaisnava tradition, Ramanuja was born on the fifth day of
the full moon in the month of Caitra in 1017 A.D. Ramanuja's family belonged to
the caste of Vadama smarta-brahmanas, who were formal Vedic scholars.
Ramanuja's father Kesavacarya was very much attached to the performance of
Vedic sacrifices or yajnas. For this reason he became famous as Sarvakratu or the
performer of all kinds of sacrifices. When the boy came of age, Kesavacarya
immersed him in Sanskrit education, teaching him grammar, logic, and the Vedas.
Although Ramanuja was well-schooled in brahminical learning, however, he had
not yet been exposed to the deeply devotional Tamil hymns glorifying Sri Visnu.
Still, his natural devotion had already been awakened by association with a nonbrahmana disciple of Sri Yamunacarya named Kancipurna, and Ramanuja
demonstrated a saintly nature even from his early childhood. As time passed he
underwent all the purificatory rites of a pious Hindu, including the sacred thread
ceremony and was married, at the age of sixteen.
Only a month after the wedding, Ramanuja's father became gravely ill and
passed away. After the passing of his father, Ramanuja moved along with his
family to Kancipuram, where he entered the academy of Yadava Prakasa, a
Vedantist of the impersonalist Sankarite school. According to some
commentators, the decision to enroll Ramanuja in the school of a non-Vaisnava is

[p.244]
evidence that his family was not strictly devoted to Visnu but were merely caste
brahmanas interested in insuring that their son would become a good scholar.
Others are convinced that this was merely Ramanuja's strategy to become wellversed in the arguments of Sankaracarya before thoroughly refuting them in his
own commentaries.
Ramanuja soon excelled among the students of Yadava Prakasa and
become his teacher's favorite student. Yadava Prakasa preached the theory of
nondualism, and stressed the illusion of all form, including the form of Sri Visnu.
As Ramanuja's devotion to Visnu blossomed, his disgust with this philosophy
grew. Still, out of respect for his teacher he avoided conflict.
Soon, however, the day arrived when he could no longer tolerate the
impersonalism of Yadava Prakasa. One day Ramanuja was massaging his guru's
back as Yadava Prakasa explained a verse from the Candogya Upanisad. The
verse contained the words kapyasam pundarikam evam aksini. Following the
interpretation of Sankaracarya, Yadava Prakasa explained that kapy means
“monkey” and asanam means “ass.” The verse therefore, as interpreted by Yadava
Prakasa was translated to mean, “Lord Visnu's lotus eyes are as red as a monkey's
ass.”
Ramanuja was enraged at this blasphemy, and the hot tears flowed which
from his eyes in anguish fell upon his guru's back. Yadava Prakasa could
understand that his disciple was disturbed, and inquired as to what the problem
was. When Ramanuja took issue with his guru's interpretation, Yadava Prakasa
was astonished. He demanded Ramanuja's interpretation. Ramanauja explained
that kapyasam means “that which sits upon the water and flourishes by
drinking,”—in other words, a lotus. So the meaning of the verse is that the lotus
eyes of Visnu are as beautiful as the red lotus which blossoms in the water.”
When Yadava Prakasa saw his disciple's expertise in defeating his
argument, he knew that he had a powerful rival in his midst. From that day on, he
began plotting Ramanuja's murder. He conspired with his disciples to go on
pilgrimage to the Ganges and kill Ramanuja in a secluded place. After killing
Ramanuja, they would bathe in the Ganges to expiate the sin. Fortunately,
Ramanuja's cousin learned of the murder plot and warned Ramanuja, who
managed to escape unharmed. After some time Yadava Prakasa returned to
Kancipurnam, and Ramanuja continued going to his lectures, although inwardly

[p.245]
he was looking for another path.
At Yamunacarya himself went to vist Ramanuja, but when he came to
Kanci he saw that Ramanuja was still a follower of Yadava Prakasa and so
Yamunacarya did not approach him. It is said that Yamunacarya watched him
from a distance and prayed for Ramanuja to become the darsana-pravartaka, or
philosophical preceptor of the Sri Vaisnava Sampradaya.
About this time, the king of Kancipuram called for Yadava Prakasa. His
daughter was possessed by a brahma-raksasa, a brahmana ghost. Yadava Prakasa
was called as an exorcist, and when he arrived with his disciples, he was brought
before the king's daughter and asked to relieve her of the influence of the ghost.
Speaking through the girl's mouth, the ghost insulted Yadava Prakasa and laughed
at him. Ramanuja was asked to try, and when he came before the girl, the
brahmana ghost said, “If Ramanuja blesses me with the dust of his lotus feet, I
shall leave this girl.” Ramanuja did so upon which the girl was cured, and the king
was deeply indebted to him.
After this humiliation before Ramanuja, it was not long before Yadava
Prakasa told Ramanuja to leave his asrama. The final split between them came
when Yadava Prakasa was discussing the meaning of two Upanisadic texts:
saravam khalv idam brahma (Candogya Upanisad 3.1, “everything is Brahman”)
and neha nanasti kincana (Katha Upanisad 4.11, “there is no distintion”). Yadava
Prakasa discussed these verses at length while explaining the theory of oneness
promoted by Sankaracarya with great eloquence. After Yadava Prakasa was
finished speaking, Ramanuja gave his own interpretation.
Ramanuja explained that sarvam khalv idam brahman would mean “the
whole universe is Brahman, if it were not for the word tajjalan in the next part of
the verse, which qualifies the meaning. Ramanujacarya held that the means not
that the universe is Brahman, but that it is pervaded by Brahman. From Brahman
the universe comes, by Brahman it is sustained, and into Brahman it ultimately
enters, just as a fish is born in water, lives in water, and is ultimately dissolved
into water. Still a fish is not water, but a separate entity entirely. In the same way
the universe, although existing within Brahman is different from Brahman. Just as
a fish can never be water, so the universe can never be Brahman. As to the second
verse, neha nanasti kincana, according to Ramanuja it does not mean “No
distinction exists,” but rather that things are not distinct in that they are are all

[p.246]
interconnected, just as pearls are strung on a thread. Since all things are interrelated and inter-connected, in a certain sense it may be said that there is no
distinction to be made between them. All things are related to Brahman and as
such do not have any existence which is distinct from Brahman. Still, while a
certain unity can be seen in the inter-relatedness of all things, everything within
the universe has its own distinct reality. Pearls strung on a thread have unity;
collectively they form an organic whole, a necklace. Still, each individual pearl
has its own unique qualities. While spirit, matter, and God may be seen as one
organic whole, still all of them have their unique qualities. Therefore, Ramanuja
argued, the principle of absolute oneness as argued by Sankaracarya cannot stand;
rather the principle of unity characterized by different qualities must be accepted.
After leaving Yadava Prakasa, Ramanuja was advised by his mother to
take guidance from Kancipurna, the non-brahmana Vaisnava whose devotion
Ramanuja greatly revered. Kancipurna advised him to serve the Visnu diety in the
temple of Lord Varada by carrying water every day to the temple. He began
serving Kancipurna with great devotion, and soon was accepted as his disciple.
Although Kancipurna was by birth a member of the sudra caste and
Ramanujacarya was a brahmana, this never influenced Ramanujacarya's devotion
for him. He accepted Kancipurna as his guru without reservation.
Ramanujacarya's wife, however, could not tolerate her husband's acceptance of a
sudra as a guru, and did her best to discourage Ramanujacarya from remaining in
his company.
Yamunacarya by this time was very old. Wracked by illness, he was on
the verge of passing from this world when he heard that Ramanujacarya had left
the school of Yadava Prakasa and had begun serving the humble Kancipurna, who
was famous as a great devotee of Visnu. He sent some disciples to bring
Ramanujacarya. When Ramanujacarya heard the news, he immediately set out
for Sri Rangam, the headquarters of the Sri Vaisnavas, where Yamunacarya lay
dying. But by the time he arrived at the side of Yamunacarya it was too late. The
master had passed from this world, entering Vaikuntha and the eternal service of
Sri Visnu.
At that time, Ramanujacarya noticed that three fingers on the right hand of
the master were closed. He asked the disciples of Yamunacarya if he had been
accustomed to hold his hand in such a way, and they replied that it was highly

[p.247]
unusual. Sripad Ramanuja could understand that this unusual gesture of the three
clenched fingers represented the three unfulfilled wishes of Yamunacarya. He then
vowed to fulfill these three wishes. He promised to teach the people in general the
religion of surrender to Visnu, training them in the five samskaras, or purificatory
processes. As he did so, one of Yamunacarya's fingers relaxed. Ramanujacarya
then vowed to comment on the hymns of the Alvars, the South Indian saints, and
with this the second finger relaxed. Finally Ramanujacarya promised to write a
scholarly commentary on the Vedanta-sutras expounding the principles of Sri
Vaisnavism as the ultimate truth of the Vedas. With this the last clenched finger
was relaxed. A look of spiritual peace came over the lotus face of
Ramanujacarya's divine master, Sri Yamunacarya, as if to say that he could now
depart peacefully, knowing that his mission was in good hands.
Upon his return to Kancipurna, Ramanujacarya gradually became
completely disinterested in his family life, his beautiful wife and home, and
absorbed himself deeply in the service of his guru Kancipurna with whom he
began spending most of his time. As Ramanujacarya spent more time at the
temple, his wife became unhappy that her husband was ignoring her. She was
further humiliated by the fact that he was neglecting her to serve a low-born sudra.
One day, Ramanujacarya invited Kancipurna for dinner, thinking that by
so doing he would be able to take the remnants of his guru's prasada, and so
become blessed. Kancipurna, being very humble arived early, before Ramanuja
returned home. Kanipurna explained to Ramanuja's wife Kambalaksa that he had
service to do in the temple and could not stay for long. With this, Kambalaksa
quickly fed him and sent him away. After Kancipurna had left, she took a long
stick and carefully picked up the banana leaf upon which he had dined, so as not to
soil her hands with what she thought to be the contaminated remnants of an
untouchable. After ordering her maidservant to clean the room carefully, she
bathed in order to purify herself. When Ramanuja returned and heard of the insult
to his guru, he was enraged.
One day, while drawing water from a well, Ramanujacarya's wife met the
wife of his guru, Kancipurna. When the water from their waterpots accidentally
became mixed, Ramanujacarya's wife cursed Kancipurna's wife, thinking that her
waterpot had become contaminated by the water of an outcaste. Whend
Ramanujacarya came to know of this insult, he was furious. He sent his wife

[p.248]
home to her parents and left to take sannyasa.
After leaving home, he went to the temple of Varadraja to see the beloved
deity of Visnu whome he had served for so long. After obtaining saffron cloth and
all the necessary paraphernalia of the renounced order, he accepted the triple staff,
(tridanda) of the Vaisnava sannyasi, symbolizing the complete surrender of mind,
body, and words to Visnu. With this, he became known as Yatiraja, “the king of
the renounced order.”
Soon after taking sannyasa, Ramanujacarya established his own monastery
or asrama, where he began training disciples in his systematic Vaisnava
interpretation of Vedanta as well as in the path of devotion to Visnu. His asrama
was established near the temple in Kanci. His first disciple was his older sister's
son, his nephew Mudali andan, also known as Dasarathi. His second disciple was
a learned and wealthy brahmana named Kurattalvan, also known as Kuresa, who
was renowned for his photographic memory.
One day the mother of Yadava Prakasa saw Ramanujacarya teaching his
disciples and was impressed by his saintly qualities. She was a great devotee of
Visnu and was somewhat unhappy that her son, Yadava Prakasa had become a
follower of Sankaracarya's impersonal monism. She encouraged Yadava Prakasa
to visit Ramanujacarya. That night Yadava Prakasa had a dream in which a
divine voice instructed him to become Ramanujacarya's disciple. The next day,
upon visiting Ramanujacarya, Yadava Prakasa found him wearing the dress of a
Vaisnava. He asked him, “Why have you rejected the school of Sankaracarya?
Why have you adopted this Vaisnava dress? Where is this sanctioned in the
scriptures? Can you show any scriptural evidence supporting your behavior?”
With this, Ramanujacarya instructed his foremost disciple, Kuresa, to
enlighten Yadava Prakasa with the scriptural evidence in support of Vaisnava
dress. He quoted extensively from the Sruti, saying, “Sruti is the best evidence.
Therefore I shall cite some references from the Sruti.[1]
In the Sruti it is said:
sa te visnorabja-cakre pavitre[2]
janmambodhim tartave carnaninra
mule bahvordadhate'nye purana
linganyamge tavakanyarpayanti

[p.249]
“To free themselves from the ocean of repeated birth and death, the best of
men decorate their bodies with the symbols of the lotus and cakra of Visnu.
aibhirbayamurukramasya cihnai rahnkita loke subhaga bhavamah
tad visno paramam padam ye'dhigaccanti lacchata[3]
“Just as those who go to the holy abode of Visnu are decorated with the
conch, lotus, disc, and club, so shall we also wear these marks and thus attain that
divine abode.
upavit-adi-baddharyah sanka-cakradayas tatha[4]
brahmanasya visesena vaisnavasya visesatah
“Brahmanas should not only wear the sacred thread, but they should also
decorate their bodies with the conch, lotus, cakra, and club of Visnu,thus
identifying themselves as Vaisnavas.
hare padakrtim atmano hitaya madhye cchidram-urdhva-purndram[5]
yo dharayati sa parasya priyo bhavati sa punyavan bhavati sa muktiman bhavati.
“One who decorates himself with the tilaka markings resembling the lotus
feet of Visnu with a space in the middle becomes dear to the Paramatma, becomes
pious, and attains liberation.”
After hearing Kuresa expound so perfectly the scriptural evidence for
adopting the dress of a Vaisnava, Yadava Prakasa asked him, “Why do you say
that Brahman has qualities ? This view (visistadvaita-vada) is not supported by
Sankaracarya. Where is the scriptural evidence for your position?
Agin Kuresa replied, citing the Sruti:
yah sarvajnah sarvavit[6]
“‘[The qualities of the Supreme Absolute Truth are that] He is all-wise and
omniscient.’ His qualities are further described in the Upanisads as follows:
na tasya karyam karanans ca vidyate[7]
na tat samas cabhyadhikas ca drsyateæ
parasya saktir-vividhaive-sruyate
svabhaviki jnana-bala-kriya ca
“He does not possess bodily form like that of an ordinary living entity: He
has a transcendental form of bliss and knowledge, and thus there is no difference
between His body and His soul. All His senses are transcendentally divine. He is

[p.250]
absolute substance. Any one of His senses can perform the action of any other
sense. Nothing is greater than Him or equal to Him. His potencies are
multifarious, and thus His deeds are automatically performed as a natural
consequence of His divine will. In other words , whatever He wills immediately
becomes reality. His divine energies are threefold: His knowledge (jnana-sakti)
energy (also known as cit-sakti or samvit-sakti), His strength energy (bala-sakti,
also known as the Lord's existence energy, sat, or sandhini-sakti), and his pastime
(kriya-sakti) energy (also known as his ecstasy energy, ananda or hladini-sakti).
narayanah param brahma tattvam narayanah parah[8]
“Narayana is the Supreme Absolute Truth, Brahman. He is the Ultimate
Reality.
harih parayanam param harih parayanam param[9]
punah punarvadamyaham harih parayanam param
“The Supreme Personality of Godhead is Sri Hari. He alone is the ultimate
shelter, the supreme refuge, the final resting place. Again and again I proclaim this
fact: Sri Hari is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.“
In this way, Kuresa went on and on, citing one scriptural evidence after the
next to establish the principles of Sri Vaisnavism. Yadava Prakasa was astounded
at the profound scholarship of this disciple of Ramanujacarya. Remembering his
mother's advice to take shelter of Ramanuja, remembering the divine voice in the
dream that told him to surrender to Ramanuja, and remembering all the offenses
he had committed at the holy feet of that great saint, Yadava Prakasa could contain
himself no longer. He fell at the feet of Ramanujacarya and prayed for his
blessings. He submitted himself as a disciple of Ramanuja, who immediately
accepted him, giving him the name Govinda Jiyar.
Yadava Prakasa later became a famous disciple of Ramanujacarya. He
freed himself from his attachment to the impersonal monism of Sankaracarya.
After taking sannyasa, he used his great powers of scholarship to promote the
cause of Ramanujacarya and Sri Vaisnavism. He was no longer a proud scholar;
now he was a humble devotee. In his final years, he was ordered by Ramanuja to
write a book on the proper religious conduct to be followed by Vaisnava sannyasis
of the Sri Vaisnava line. This book is called Yati-dharma-sammuccaya, and is still
studied and followed by the sannyasis of the Sri sampradaya.

[p.251]
As Ramanuja's fame spread, the disciples of Yamunacarya in Sri Rangam
begged Ramanuja to come and lead them. Finally, after taking permission from
his beloved deity Lord Varada, Ramanuja left Kancipuram for Sri Rangam, to
begin his new life.
After arriving in Sri Rangam, Ramanujacarya immersed himself in
studying the scriptures under the guidance of Mahapurna, a prominent disciple of
Yamunacarya. With the help of Mahapurna, Ramanujacarya became expert in
many scriptures, including the Nyasatattva, the Gitartha-sangraha, the Siddhitraya,
the Brahma-Sutra, and the Pancaratras. After some time Mahapurna advised
Ramanujacarya to go to the great Goshtipurna and accept initiation in the
Vaisnava mantra from him.
At the behest of Mahapurna, Ramanuja approached Goshtipurna for the
mantra, but was refused, for Goshtipurna was reluctant to give such a confidential
mantra to a relative newcomer. Ramanujacarya approached Goshtipurna 18 times
with great humility, finally breaking into tears and pleading for his mercy. At last
Goshtipurna gave him the mantra, after first swearing him to absolute secrecy.
When Ramanuja had vowed never to repeat the mantra to anyone else,
Goshtipurna whispered the mantra in his ear saying, “This mantra is most
powerful. Whoever chants it will attain liberation; he will return to the spiritual
Vaikuntha planets where he will achieve the personal service of the Lord.”
As he left the temple and proceeded towards Sri Rangam, a crowd gathered
around Ramanujacarya. They had heard that he was to receive the mantra from
Goshtipurna, and begged to know its secret. Inspired to distribute the magic of the
mantra that could free anyone who chants it from material existence, Ramanuja
announced to the crowd: “Please chant this mantra: Om namo narayanaya.”
The crowd was overjoyed, and felt that they had been truly blessed, but
when the news reached Goshtipurna, he called for Ramanuja. Outraged that his
new disciple would disobey his order so quickly, he demanded an explanation. “I
told you to keep this mantra a secret. Why have you so quickly revealed it to the
masses? Do you know the penalty for such behavior?”
Ramanuja replied, “Yes, gurudeva, I may go to hell for disobeying your
order.“
“Then why have you done such a thing?”
“ My beloved teacher, I realized that the power of the mantra given by you

[p.252]
could deliver everyone who hears it. When I saw the earnest desire of these
people to be saved from material life, I could not contain myself. I felt some
divine inspiration to distribute your mercy to all of them. If this is a great sin, then
I must be punished by your holiness. Condemn me to hell, then, if my sin warrants
it. But please do not show your wrath to these simple people who begged me for
the mantra.”
When Goshtipurna saw the earnest sincerity of his disciple, his heart was
moved. After all, what greater principle can there be than the distribution of the
Lord's mercy. Although Ramanuja had disobeyed the letter of his instructions
about the mantra, he had understood the real spirit of the mantra itself. He would
make a great preacher of the Sri sampradaya, and had shown that he had the
capacity to instill devotion in the hearts of the people in general. How could he
then be condemned?
Goshtipurna fell at Ramanuja's feet, saying, “Forgive me, my child. It is
you who are my master, and I the disciple. Who am I to take the role of your guru?
How could I know your greatness? Accept me as your disciple.”
After this incident, Ramanujacarya's reputation spread far and wide. He
was regarded as an incarnation of Laksmana himself. He began training more and
more disciples, and his camp grew. He engaged many scholars in debate and
defeated them by propounded his sytematic view of Vedanta, known as
Visistadvaita-vada, or qualified monism. One such scholar was Yajnamurti.
Yajnamurti was a famous pandita who had defeated many scholars in
argument and had written many commentaries on the scriptures. He challenged
Ramanuja to a debate saying that if he lost, he would carry Ramanuja's shoes and
become his disicple. Ramanuja, for his part, declared that if he was defeated, he
would give up books and arguments forever. The debate began and went on for 17
days. Ramanuja was discouraged. He prayed fervently to Lord Varada, his
beloved Deity, for help. That night he had a dream in which the Deity assured him
of victory, advising him to follow the line of reasoning given by Yamunacarya.
Uplifted by his divine vision, Ramanuja appeared in the arena of debate with
renewed confidence. Before the debate began, however, Yajnamurti surrendered
himself to the holy feet of Ramanujacarya, saying, “You are my master. You are
glowing with the confidence of one who is in connection with divinity. I realize
now that it is futile to argue with you. Please accept me.”

[p.253]
From that day on, Ramanuja's reputation increased. During this time, he
toured India with his disciples, traveling as far north as Kashmir, where he
consulted the commentary of Bodhayana on the Vedanta Sutras. Ramanuja was
also a great advocate of proper Deity worship and had a habit of reforming the
system of worship wherever he went. In this way, he standardized the system of
worship throughout the Vaisnava temples of India, eliminating many of the
practices of nonVaisnavas that had become traditional. His system was not,
however, greeted with much enthusisam in Jagannatha Puri, where worship is
performed according to the system of raga-marga, or spontaneous devotion. It is
said that after he attempted to reform the system of Deity worship there, Lord
Jagannatha became disturbed. One night, as Ramanuja slept, he was transported
by the power of Jagannatha to Kurmasthan. When he awoke, he thought he had
committed a great offense to Visnu. Mistaking the deity of Kurma for a Sivalingam, he thought that Visnu had thrown him into a Siva temple. When at last he
realized that it was a temple of Lord Kurma, Ramanuja set about reforming the
deity worship there.
After this, Ramanuja wrote the Sri-Bhasya, his commentary on Vedanta,
and his fame spread still further. The king of Cola, who was a great follower of
Siva, sent a petition to all the famous scholars of South India, demanding their
signature. The petition declared Siva to be the supreme. Many scholars signed,
but Ramanuja refused. When this came to the king's attention, he arranged to
abduct Ramanuja, who managed to escape with the help of his devoted follower,
Kuresa. They exchanged garments, and Ramanuja, disguised as a householder,
slipped through the guards that surrounded his camp. Meanwhile the king's
soldiers arrested Kuresa, who had put on the sannyasa dress of Ramanuja. This
king was the same king whose daughter was saved from a ghost by Ramanuja.
When Kuresa was dragged before the king in the dress of Ramanuja, the king
demanded that he glorify Siva as the supreme. Kuresa refused. Because
Ramanuja had helped the king's daughter, the king decided to be lenient. He told
his servants not to kill their prisoner, but merely to put his eyes out for refusing to
see the superior position of Siva. After Kuresa was released, his eyesight was
restored by a miracle. The king however, did not fare so well. He developed a
black boil on his neck and died. Henceforth that king became famous as “Krmikantha,” or worm-throat, because of the infection that killed him.

[p.254]
Meanwhile, Ramanuja delivered many thousands of people to the cause of
Sri Vaisnavism and established many temples. He traveled through what is now
Madurai and Mysore, converting many Jains on his way. At one point he defeated
one thousand Jains in argument, after which they committed suicide rather than
become Vaisnavas.
Ramanuja was merciful not only to those in the renounced order, but also
to those surrendered grhasthas who had given their lives to his mission. One such
grhastha was Dhanurdasa. When he met Ramanuja, Dhanurdasa was very much
attached to his beautiful wife. One day, Ramanuja asked him if he wanted to see a
real beauty, and out of curiosity, Dharnurdasa agreed. Ramanuja took him to the
temple of Narayana and made him behold the beauty of the deity. Upon realizing
that the Lord's beauty eclipses all beauties of this world, Dhanurdasa became a
great devotee and follower of Ramanuja.
Dhanurdasa was an example of detachment. To teach detachment to one
of his disciples, Ramanuja once staged the following demonstration. He had one
of his disciples go to the place where the sannyasis bathed to switch their clothes,
so that after bathing there would be some confusion. When the sannyasis, who
were all renowned scholars and renunciants, were finished bathing, they found that
their clothes had been exchanged. One swami was wearing the cloth of another,
and so an argument ensued. As one after another finished his bath and went to find
his clothes, the argument grew more heated. In this way, these great scholars of
renunciation were seen to be attached to some simple pieces of cloth.
Then Ramanuja sent his disciple to the home of Dhanurdasa, after first
arranging for Dhanurdasa to serve in the temple, thus making sure that he would
not be at home. The disciple went to the home of Dhanurdasa in the evening, and,
following Ramanuja's orders began stealing the jewelry from the body of
Dhanurdasa's wife. After stripping the ornaments from one side of her body, the
disicple was about to go when suddenly she turned over in her sleep. The disciple
was shocked and left through the window immediately. Ramanuja had instructed
him to wait outside the window for the return of Dhanurdasa, to record his
reaction. After some time, Dhanurdasa returned home. At that time, Dhanurdasa
wife asked him, “Dhanurdasa, is there something wrong at the temple?”
“No, my dear. Why?”
“I am worried that they are in need of money, but ashamed to ask for it.

[p.255]
We must do something to help them.”
“What makes you say that?”
“Because one of the devotees from the temple snuck in through the
window and began taking the jewelry from my body. I think those poor saints
must desperately need our help to do something like that.”
“What did you do?”
“I turned over, but he fled through the window.”
“Why did you do that? You scared him away! Now what will we do?”
“I didn't mean to scare him. I only turned over so that he could take the
ornaments from the other side of my body as well.”
Dhanurdasa chastised her saying, “If you were not so affected by false ego,
you would have given him all your jewels. Now what will we do? We have failed
miserably!”
With this, his wife began to lament saying, “You are right. It is only my
pride that kept me from surrendering everything. How will we ever make any
advancement?”
From his hiding place Ramanuja's disciple was astonished at the humility
and surrender of Dhanurdasa and his chaste wife. When the disciple returned to his
guru, he reported everything that had taken place. Ramanuja then explained to
him the meaning of both these events—the garments of the sannyasis and the
jewels of Dhanurdasa's wife: in this case, the sannyasis were so attached to some
ragged bits of cloth that they were fighting over them, whereas Dhanurdasa and
his wife, although grhasthas, were so free from attachment to material things that
they were ready to have their jewels stolen by the devotees if they were needed for
the service of the Lord.
In this way, Ramanuja continued to instructed his disciples both by
example and by precept. His influence on Vaisnavism is powerfully felt to this
day. His commentary on Vedanta, the Sri Bhasya is still considered to be the
most formidable challenge to the commentary of Sankaracarya. It is the most
famous of the Vaisnava commentaries. Apart from the Sri Bhasya, the most
important of Ramanujacarya's works are his commentary on Bhagavad-gita and
his Vedartha-samgraha, which summarizes the essential Vedic principles.
According to tradition, Sripad Ramanujacarya lived to be 100 years old. His
disciplic succession continues to this day in maintaining the traditions of Sri

[p.256]
Vaisnava practice, deity worship and philosophy that he systemized in his
lifetime. Ramanujacarya passed away on the tenth day of the waning moon in the
month of Phalguna, which corresponds to the month of January February on the
Christian calendar.
Lives of the Saints
Ramchandra Kaviraja

Srila Narottama dasa Thakura has sung: “daya koro sri acarya prabhu
srinivasa, ramacandra sanga mage narottama dasa—O Srinivasa acarya Prabhu,
kindly have mercy upon me; Narottama dasa always prays for the association of
Ramacandra Kaviraja.”
Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja was one of the internal associates of Narottama
Thakura. The two of them were practically inseparable. Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja
had obtained the full mercy and blessings of Srinivasa acarya. Sri Ramacandra
Kaviraja's father's name was Ciranjiva Sena—his mother's name was Sri Sunanda.
At first Sri Ciranjiva Sen lived in Kumara Nagara. After he married the daughter
of the poet Sri Damodara Kavi, he moved to the village of Sri Khanda. Ciranjiva
Sen was a Mahabhagavata, a topmost devotee of the Lord. The devotees of Sri
Khanda, headed by Narahari Sarakara Thakura all had great affection and respect
for Ciranjiva.
Ciranjiva is mentioned in Caitanya-Caritamrta by Krsna dasa Kaviraja
Goswami as follows (CC Madhya 11.92): “Gopinatha acarya continued to point

[p.257]
out the devotees [to Prataparudra Maharaja]. ‘Here is Suklambara. See, there is
Sridhara. Here is Vijaya, and there is Vallabha Sena. Here is Purusottama, and
there is Sanjaya. And here are all the residents of Kulina-grama, such as Satyaraja
Khan and Ramananda. Indeed, all of them are present here. Please see. Here are
Mukunda dasa, Narahari, Sri Raghunandana, Ciranjiva and Sulocana, all residends
of Khanda. How many names shall I speak to you? All the devotees you see here
are associates of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is their life and soul.’ The King
said, ‘Upon seeing all these devotees, I am much astonished, for I have never seen
such an effulgence. Indeed their effulgence is like the brilliance of a million suns.
Nor have I ever heard the Lord's names chanted so melodiously.’”
Mukunda dasa, Narahari, Sri Raghunandana, and Ciranjiva all lived in
Khanda.
They were as one, for their aim in life was the same, and every year at the time of
the Ratha-yatra festival they used to go to Jagannatha Puri dhama to take darsan of
the holy feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, to take part in the kirtana and behold his
wonderful dancing and chanting.
Ciranjiva Sen took birth in a vaidya family, that is, within the doctor caste.
His two sons were Sri Ramacandra and Sri Govinda. These two sons were great
jewels. Both of them attained the mercy of Srinivasa acaraya Prabhu, after which
they went to live in Teliya-budhari-grama. Budhari-grama is in the Mursidabad
district.
Ramacandra Kaviraja was especially enthusiastic, earnest, persevering,
energetic, intelligent, and beautiful. His maternal grandfather was Sri Damodara

[p.258]
Kaviraja, who was famous as a great poet. He used to instruct people in the
philosophy of the saktas. He was also initiated into the path of dharma followed by
the saktas.
After the passing away of their father, Ciranjiva, Sri Ramacandra and Sri
Govinda went to live at the place of their grandfather Damodara Kaviraja. As they
were living with their scholarly grandfather, who was a follower of sakta-ism, they
too gradually became infected with this anti-devotional philosophy, even though
their father had been a great mahabhagavata devotee and personal associate of Sri
Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Ramacandra Sen became a doctor and gradually he became
famous as a highly learned poet as well.
One day, Ramacandra Kaviraja was on the road to Yajigrama, on his way
home from his wedding. At that time, Srinivasa acarya was passing on the road,
accompanied by his followers.
One day Shrinivasa Acharaya was in Yajigrama at his own house, where
many devotees had gathered to hear him lecture on Shrimad-Bhagavatam. At that
time, passing by the house of Shrinivasa Acharya was Ramachandra Kaviraja the
son of Chiranjiva Sen (one of Mahaprabhu's eternal associates). He had just been
married, and he and his new bride were on their way back from the wedding.
From a long way off, Shrinivasa Acharya saw Ramachandra Kaviraja,
and Ramachandra Kaviraja also saw Shrinvasa Acharya from a distance. Upon
seeing each other from a distance a deep mood of friendship arose within the
hearts of those two eternally perfect devotees of Shri Gauranga. After seeing each
other they were eager to meet one another. Shrinivasa Acharya inquired about

[p.259]
Ramachandra Kaviraja from the local people. They told him that he was a great
pandita named Ramacandra—a learned poet and expert doctor from a family of
doctors and scholars. Hear all this, Srinivasa acarya smiled, for he was greatly
pleased.
Ramachandra Kaviraja had heard about Shrinivasa Acharya and was eager
to have his darsana. In this way, he finally went to the house of Srinivasa acarya
along with his new bride and were introduced by some of the local people. The
day passed quickly in discussion of Hari-katha. They spent the night where they
had been staying since coming to Yajigrama, at a brahmana's house near the home
of Shrinvasa Acharaya, and the following morning went to Shrinivasa Acharya
and fell before his feet offering prostrated obeisances.
The Acharya bade Ramachandra Kaviraja to get up from the ground, and heartily
embraced him saying, "Life after life you have been my friend. Providence has
brought us together again today by arranging our meeting." Both of them felt great
happiness as a result of their having met. Seeing that Ramchandra had an acute
and deeply learned transcendental intelligence, Shrinivasa was very happy. He
began to make him hear the Goswami scriptures. Ramacandra's pure behavior
which was always in accordance with the scriptures very much pleased Srinivasa
acarya, and after a few days the Acharya initiated him in the divine Radha-Krishna
mantra.
After a few days, Ramacandra Kaviraja left Yajigrama and returned to his
own village. At that time, the local saktas became envious of him, seeing that he
had been initiated into the Vaisnava faith. Ramacandra Kaviraja always marked

[p.260]
his body with the twelve tilaka marks of a devotee and always chanted the holy
name of Hari.
One day, after having taken his bath in the Ganges, Ramacandra Kaviraja
was on his way home when the saktas confronted him saying, “Kaviraja! Why
don't you worship Siva? Your grandfather Damodara Kaviraja was a great devotee
of Siva, so why have you given up his worship?”
Ramacandra said, “Both Siva and Brahma are guna-avataras, qualitative
incarnations of the Lord, but Krsna is the root of all avataras, all incarnations.
Simply by worshiping Krsna all worship is performed, just as by watering the root
of a tree, all the leaves and branches are automatically nourished. Prahlada,
Dhruva, Vibhisana and others who were dear devotees of Krsna are always
glorified by Brahma and Siva. On the other hand Ravana, Kumbhakarna,
Vanasura, and others were envious of Krsna and were solely devoted to Siva. But
because they were envious of Krsna, Siva himself saw to their destruction.
“When Brahma creates the universe, He prays to Visnu for success in the
matter of creation. And Siva also submits himself to Lord Visnu by carrying upon
his head the Ganges, the water that has washed the lotus feet of Visnu and that
sanctifies the three worlds.”
Hearing all this, the smarta brahmanas, the materialistic worshipers of Siva
known as the saktas were speechless.
Gradually, Ramacandra Kaviraja became eager to go to Vrndavana and
take darssana of the holy feet of the Goswamis there. After receiving permission
and blessings from various Vaisnavas in Bengal, including Sri Raghunandana

[p.261]
Thakura, he set out for Vrndavana on an auspicious day. On the way to
Vrndaavana, he vistied Gaya, Kasi, Prayaga, and many other holy places. At long
last he arrived in Mathura. There bathed in the Yamuna at Visrama ghata, and
after bathing, he rested for some time. He took darsana of the adi Kesava deity at
the birthplace of Sri Krsna and then continued on his way to Vrndavana.
At that time, Srinivasa acarya was staying in Vrndavana. Arriving there,
Ramacandra Kaviraja offered his obeisances at the lotus feet of Sri Jiva Goswami
and Srinivasa acarya and gave the devotees there the auspicious news about all the
devotees in Bengal. On the order of Jiva Goswami, Ramacandra Kaviraja went to
visit the three principal deities of Vrndavana: Sri Madana-Mohan, Sri Govinda,
and Sri Gopinatha, as well as the memorial shrine or samadhi of Sanatana
Goswami. He took darsana of the holy feet of the principle Goswamis residing in
Vrndavana at the time, including Sri Lokanatha Goswami, Sri Gopala Bhatta
Goswami, and Sri Bhugarbha Goswami. Seeing Ramacandra's wonderful expertise
in composing beautiful verses glorifying Sri Krsna, they gave him the title
“Kaviraja,” in recognition of his scholarship.
After staying in Vrndavana for some time under the guidance of those
great souls, and after visiting the important holy places, Ramacandra was ordered
by the Goswamis to return to Bengal. Arriving in Bengal, he passed through Sri
Khanda, Yajigrama, Khadadaha, Ambika Kalna, and other famous Vaisnava
centers, before arriving in Nabadwipa, where he visited Mayapura. There he went
to the ancient house of Jagannatha Misra, where he found Mahaprabhu's old
family servant, ^sana Thakura. After introducing himself, he took the dust from

[p.262]
the holy feet of ^sana and prayed for his blessings, which he received.
Ramacandra Kaviraja was extremely dear to Srinivasa acarya, and for this reason,
Narottama Thakura considered Ramacandra Kaviraja to be his life and soul. A
discussion of their pastimes together is found in the chapter on Narottama dasa
Thakura.
Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja delivered many sinners and nonbelievers to a life
of auspiciousness as a result of his mercy. At the festival in Kheturi-grama, he was
one of the leaders. On the order of Narottama dasa Thakura and Srinivasa acarya
he again went to Vrndavana. When he arrived there, he found that almost all the
Goswamis had passed away. When he found that so many great souls had passed
away, his heart was deeply pained. After some days in Vrndavana, feeling the
pain of separation in this way, while deeply meditating upon the lotus feet of Sri
Radha and Govinda, he entered into their eternal Vrndavana pastimes. His
disappearance day is on the third day of the dark moon in the month of Pausa.
Sri Ramacandra Kaviraja's disciple was Sri Harinama acarya. Ramacandra
Kaviraja composed many beautiful verses in glorification of Sri Gauranga. The
following song is an example of one of the many prayers composed by Sri
Ramacandra Kaviraja. In this song he glorifies the inconceivable transcendental
mercy of Lord Sri Krsna Caitanya Mahaprabhu who descended to save all souls in
the dense darkenss of the age of Kali; here he also expresses his deep Vaisnava
humility, by lamenting that he was unable to taste even a drop of the Lord's mercy.

Song by Ramacandra Kaviraja

[p.263]
dekha dekha are bhai gauranga canda parakasa
purnimara canda yena udita akasa
simharasi paurnamasi gaura avatara
chadala yuger bhara dharani nistara
mahitale achaye yateka jivatapa
harala sakala pahun nijahi pratapa
kaliyuge tapa-japa nahi kona tantra
prakasila mahapratu hare-krsna mantra
premera vadara kari bharila samsara
pataki naraki saba paila nistara
andha avadhi yata kare parakasa
bindu na padila mukhe ramacandra dasa.

“Just see! Just see, brothers how Sri Gauranga has arisen like a golden moon. Just
as the full moon had arisen in the sky, another, fuller moon arose in the form of
the Gaura avatara, just to deliver us all from this dark age of ignorance.
His mercy takes away all the suffering of the jiva souls. Japa, mantras,
austerities and other rituals are all useless for purification in the age of Kali. The
only means of deliverance is the hare krsna mantra. Mahaprabhu is so kind that he
has manifest the nectar of the holy name, so that the souls in this dark age can be
released from the cycle of repeated birth and death and a hellish life in the lower
planetary systems and experience divine love.
Whether one is blind or dumb does not matter; everyone one can drown in

[p.264]
this inundation. In this way Caitanya Mahaprabhu has drowned everyone in love
of Godhead, but Ramacandra dasa is so unfortunate that he could not taste even a
drop of that nectar.
Shri Rasikananda Dev

In the Christian year 1590, on the 18th day of the month of Karttika, on the
night of the Diwali festival, Shri Rasikananda dev took birth within this world. His
father, Raja Shri Achyutadev was the zamindara of a place which was known as
Rayani or Rohini. He had been sonless for a long time, and felt that by the grace
of the Lord of the Universe, he had finally got a jewel of a son. Shri
Rasikananda's other name was Murari. When his son Murari was a young man,
Raja Achyutananda arranged for his wedding. Shri Rasikananda's wife's name
was Shri Shyamadasi. He was as beautiful as he was learned, and in scholarship
he was accomplished in all his subjects. After some time he became anxious to
take shelter of the lotus feet of a bonafide guru. One day, he heard a voice in the
sky say, "Don't worry. You will go to the place of Shyamananda Prabhu and take
initiation, becoming his disciple." The voice in the sky told him not to worry, and
advised him to go quickly to the great devotee named Shyamananda and take
shelter of his lotus feet. Right after this, Shri Rasikananda started out on the road
to Shyamananda's place.
Soon after this, from Dharenda-Bahadur-pura, Shyamanda Prabhu was on
his way to the village of Rohini, accompanied by many devotees. Rasikananda
could see that his dreams were coming true; he could see a great devotee coming
down the road and immediately understood that it was Shyamananda. The acharya
had an unparalleled bodily effulgence, and Rasikananda could see that he was
always overwhelmed with gaura-krishna-rasa, tasting the mellows of devotion to
Shri Krishna and Shri Chaitanya. Shyamananda Prabhu's eyes were filled with
tears of divine love. In his hand, he held a beautiful japa-mala, upon which he
counted the names of Krishna that he was constantly chanting. Shri Rasikananda

[p.265]
fell down before him, offering eightfold prostrated obeisances. At that time, he
cordinally invited Rasikananda to come to the King's own compound. There he
washed the lotus feet of Shayamanda Prabhu, and worshiped the acharya with
fragrant incesnes and flowers. At that time, Rasikananda offered his family, his
children, and himself to the lotus feet of Shri Shyamananda Prabhu. On an
auspicious day, Shri Shyamanda Prabhu gave initiation in the Radha-Krishna
mantra to Rasikananda Prabhu and his wife.
After receiving initiation from Shri Shyamananda Prabhu, Rasikananda
traveled for some time with his gurudeva, always remaining close to his lotus
feet. He was the most intimate disciple of Shyamanda Prabhu.As a consequence,
when the deities in Gopijana-vallabha-pura were installed, Shyamananda Prabhu
entrusted Rasikananda Prabhu with the responsibility of taking care of the deities.
From that time on, Rasikananda Prabhu accepted that responsibility with great
care and became complete absorbed in the service of the deities there. The
devotees were enchanted and captivated by his unprecedented service to the
deities, which increased their divine beauty and pleasure. After establishing the
worship on a sound footing, he preached the message of Gaura and Nityananda far
and wide. By his influence many agnostics and atheists became gaura-nityanandabhaktas.
Bhakti Ratnakara says, "Rasikananda's preaching was greatly influential;
by his mercy many dacoits, blasphemers, demons, and nonbelievers were
delivered. By his mercy, the jewel of bhakti was bestowed even upon Yavanas,
Muslims, and untouchable outcastes of all description. He went from town to
town with his followers, making many disciples and engaging them in Krishna's
service. He even made the wild elephants his disciples, and engaged them in the
service of Krishna dn the Vaishnavas. Shri Rasikananda delivered many yavanas
and mlechhas. One cannot count how many houses he visited on his preaching
tour, or how many souls were delivered. Rasikanananda was almost like a
madman, always absorbed in the holy name of Krishna, in nam-sankirtan.
Everyone was astonished even to hear his wonderful qualities sung."
In summary, Rasikananda Prabhu, by his mercy, delivered many untouchables,

[p.266]
outcastes, meateaters, muslims, atheists, and agnostics. The King of Mayur-bhanj,
Raja Vaidyanatha Bhanj, as well as the king of Patashapur, Raja Gajapati, as well
as the King of Mayana, Chandrabhanu and many other pious royal personages also
took shelter at the lotus feet of Rasikananda Prabhu. The especially wicked
Zamindara, Bhima, the yavana Suva Ahmed, and the atheist Shrikara, as well as
many other persons gave up their evil ways and took shelter at the lotus feet of
Shri Rasikananda Prabhu. He made wild elephants in the jungle chant the holy
name of Gopal Krishna. He made tigers give up their mentality of being cruel
beasts of prey, and converted them to Krishna-bhakti.
Shri Rasikananda Dev, on the order of his guru Shyamananda Prabhu preached for
nearly fourty-six years the message of Shri Gaurachandra. After this, at Remuna,
he entered into the eternal lila of the Lord at the lotus feet of Gopinatha. In the
year 1578 of the Shaka era, corresponding to the year 1652 of the Christian era,
Shri Rasikananda Dev, from Sarata Grama, went to Remuna and in the association
of the devotees there, after speaking some Krishna-katha, in which he instructed
everyone to always worship Krishna, he entered the Gopinath temple, and
touching the lotus feet of Shri Gopinath, he passed away.
Shri Rasikananda had three sons: Shri Radhananda, Shri Krishna Govinda,
and Shri Radha Krishna. Some of his descendants of currently reside in present
day Gopijana-vallabha-pura. Shri Rasikananda Prabhu has written a few books,
notably a biography of Shyamananda Prabhu called the Shri Shyamananda
Shataka. His other works include the Shrimad-bhagavat-ashtaka as well as
different collections of verses, prayers and songs.
Lives of the Saints
Sanatana Goswami
vairagya-yug-bhakti-rasam prayatnair
apayayan mam anabhipsum andham
krpambudhir yah para-duhkha-duhkhi
sanatanas tam prabhum asrayami

[p.267]
[Raghunatha dasa Goswami has glorified Sanatana Goswami as follows in
his Vilapa Kusumanjali (6)] “I was unwilling to drink the nectar of devotional
service possessed of renunciation, but Sanatana Goswami, out of his causeless
mercy, made me drink it, even though I was unable to do so. Therefore he is an
ocean of mercy. He is very much compassionate to fallen souls like me, and thus it
is my duty to offer my respectful obeisances unto his lotus feet and take shelter of
him.”
The transcendental position of Sanatana Goswami is glorified in the GauraGanodesha-Dipika of Shri Kavi Karnapura (181):

sa rupa-manjari-prestha
purasid rati-manjari
socyate nama-bhedena
lavanga-manjari budhaih

"Rupa Manjari's closest friend, who was known by the names Rati-Manjari
and Lavanga Manjari, appeared in the pastimes of Shri Chaitanya mahaprabhu as
Shri Sanatana Goswami, who was considered to be a personal extension of the
body of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu."
Sanatana Goswami's literary contribution to the Gaudiya Vaishnava
Sampradaya is paralleled only by Rupa and Raghunath Das Goswami. The most

[p.268]
important of the scriptures he compiled are the Hari-bhakti-Vilasa, the Brihadbhagavatamrita, his Dasama-tippani commentary on Shrimad-Bhagvatam, also
known as the Brihad-Vaishanva-Toshani, and the Dashama-charita.
Shri Jiva Goswami gives the following account of the ancestorial line of
his uncle, Sanatana Goswami in the conclusion of his Laghu-Vaishnava-toshani, a
commentary on the Bhagavata: Sarvajna was a Yajur Vedik brahmana descended
from the dynasty of the sage Bharadvaja Muni, and as such was the most
respectable brahmana of Karnataka. He became the king of the region in 1381
A.D. He was so learned that he was known as "Jagad-guru" or world-teacher. His
son was Aniruddha, who became king in 1416 A.D. Aniruddha had two queens
and two sons, Rupeshvara and Harihara. Rupeshvara was expert in all the branches
of the sacred shastra. His brother Harihara was expert in the scriptures concerning
royal politics and was also highly educated. Rupeshvara left Karnataka for
Paurastya with his wife. He was well-versed in many branches of learning. There,
he became the friend of the king, Raja Shri Shekhareshvar. Rupeshvara's son was
Padmanabha, who was a great pandit in the Vedic scriptures. Padmanabha settled
at Navahatta, (Naihatti) on the banks of the Ganges in Bengal. He had eight
daughters and five sons. All his sons were expert in the scriptures. The names of
his sons were Purushottama, Jagannatha, Narayana, Murari, and Mukundadeva.
His youngest son, Mukunda, moved to Fateyabada near Jessore in Bakla
Chandradwip Paragana. Shri Mukunda deva's son was Shri Kumara Deva. He
had many children. In their midst were Shri Rupa, Shri Sanatana and Shri
Anupama or Vallabha. They were all great Mahabhagavata devotees of the Lord."

[p.269]
Shri Sanatana Goswami was born in 1488. Rupa Goswami was born in
1493.
Rupa and Vallabha (Anupama) were educated in a village called Sakurma near the
capital of Gauda (Bengal) and lived in their maternal uncle's house when their
father died. Sanatana was Kumaradeva's eldest son. Rupa was his second son.
Vallabha was his youngest son. Jiva was Vallabha's only son. Sanatana and Rupa
were the names given by Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to the two brothers when they
later became his disciples. Their former names are not known. Some say that
their original names were Amara and Santosha respectively.
The ruler of Bengal, Hussain Shah, heard from pious men about the
qualifications of Rupa and Sanatana. Having herad their glories, the Shah wanted
to appoint them to positions in his regime. Out of fear of the Yavana king, they
were forced to accept. At that time it was not unusual for Hindus to accept posts
in the government of the Muslim king. Among those Hindus who had accepted
posts in the government of the Shah were many great devotees. Among them
were Keshava Vasu Khan, who served the Shah as a City Magistrate or Police
Commisioner in Bengal. Gopinatha Vasu and Purandara Khan served as Prime
Ministers. Shri Mukunda Kaviraja was a doctor. Keshava Chatri was a Royal
Diplomat and Counsel to the King. Sanatan became known as Sakara Mallik and
was appointed Private Secretary. Mullik means"Lord" and was a title often given
by the Muslims to respectable and wealthy families with intimate government ties.
Rupa became known as Dabir Khas, and was appointed Revenue Officer and
Secretary of Treasury by Hussain Shah, the king of Gauda. Shri Vallabha, or

[p.270]
Anupama was Chief Superintendent of the Royal Mint. They were well-rewarded
by the Shah for their services, who saw to it that they were given great riches.
According to the Vedic customs, if one associates with Muslim he becomes
contaminated and must perform purificatory rituals. Santana Goswami always
associated with Muslims without paying much attention to the customs of the day,
and as such considered himself to be fallen from his high brahmana caste. He
therefore always presented himself as fallen, although this was only a display of
his great Vaishnava humility for which he was celebrated in the Chaitanya
Charitamrita and praised by Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu himself.
Shri Rupa and Sanatana made their headquarters in Ramakeli, which had
been established as the Capitol of Bengal in 1486 by Sultan Barbak. At present,
Ramkeli is located in the Maldah district of West Bengal, near the border of
Bengal on the Ganges, and is about five miles from the Maldah railway station.
Ramkeli was also the home of many famous devotees, including Shri Nrishinga,
the son of Advaita Acharya.
From within and without Bengal many greatly learned scholars and
brahmanas used to come to see Rupa and Sanatan in their homes. From Karnataka
came many brahmanas who settled near the house of Rupa and Sanatan. Their
residential home was near the banks of the Ganges near a town calld Bhattavari.
From Nabadwip Dham many brahmanas and pandits also came to Ramakeli to
serve Rupa and Sanatana in different ways.
Shri Rupa and Sanatana were accomplished scholars—they were the crest
jewels of the Gaudiya Vaishnava scholars. Their teacher in philosophy and

[p.271]
scripture had been the brother of the great Sarvabhauma
Bhattacharya—Vidyavachaspati, who taught Sanatana Goswami all the Vedic
scriptures. His devotion to Vidyavachaspati cannot be described.
Vidyavachaspati would often stay in Ramakeli.
The three brothers, Sanatana, Rupa, and Anupama were absorbed in
Bhava-bhakti from early childhood. Remembering Vrindavana they used to play
in the forest of Tamal, Keli-Kadamba, and Tulsi trees that surrounded their
childhood home. In the midst of this were ponds they named after Radha Kunda
and Shyama Kunda. In this way they were constantly absorbed in rendering
service to Shri Madana Mohana. Hearing of the wonderful pastimes of Shri
Gaurasundara in nearby Nabadwipa, they were anxious to one day have his
darshan. But they were told by their inner voice, "You must be patient. Soon you
will have darshan of that great Lord who is the savior of the fallen."
When Shri Sanatana was still young he had an unusual dream. In his
dream he saw a brahmana. The brahmana gave him a Shrimad-Bhagavatam.
Upon receiving the Bhagavata, Sanatana's hair stood up in ecstasy. His dream
broke. When he awoke and saw that the brahmana and the Bhagavata had gone,
he became very depressed. The next morning, after he had bathed, while he was
seated for worshiping the Lord, a brahmana appeared, carrying the Bhagavata.
Standing near Sanatana, the brahmana said, "Take this Bhagavat. Always study it
and all perfection will be yours." Saying this, the brahmana gave him the
Bhagavat and went away.
Upon receiving the treasure of the holy Bhagavata, Shri Sanatana's ecstasy

[p.272]
knew no bounds. From that day on, Shri Sanatana would only study the
Bhagavata, leaving aside other scriptures, knowing the Bhagavata to be the
essence of all scriptures. In his Krishna-lila-stava, he has written,

madeka bandho matsangin
madguro man mahadhana
man nistaraka madbhagya
madananda namo'stu te

Sanatana Goswami offers his respects to the Bhagavata, by saying: "O holy
Bhagavata, you are my only company, my only friend, and my guru. You are my
greatest treasure, my personal savior, the emblem of my highest fortune, the very
form of ecstasy. I offer my obeisances to you."
When they heard the news that Shri Chaitanya, the life and treasure of
Nadia, had taken sannyasa and gone to Puri, Rupa and Sanatana fainted. Having
never seen Mahaprabhu in Navadwip, Rupa and Sanatana were despondent upon
hearing that he was leaving Bengal forever. At this time they heard a divine voice
saying, "Do not be in anxiety. The merciful Shri Gauranga will soon come here."
Hearing this divine voice, they were consoled.
After happily spending five years headquartered in Puri, Mahaprabhu
wanted to return to Bengal to take darshan of the Ganges and to see his mother,
and so he set out for Nabadwipa. The joy of the devotees was boundless; getting
the opportunity to see her son after such a long time Sachidevi completely forgot

[p.273]
herself. For many days she cooked and Gaurasundara enjoyed her cooking.
Mahaprabhu stayed at the house of Advaita in Shantipura for some days and then
continued on to Ramkeli Gram. This is recorded in Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita:
"When Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu began to proceed from Kuliya toward
Vrindavana, thousands of men were with him and all of them were devotees.
Wherever the Lord visited, crowds of innumerable people came to see Him.
When they saw Him, all their unhappiness and lamentation disappeared.
Wherever the Lord touched the ground with His lotus feet, people immediately
came and gathered the dirt. Indeed they gathered so much that many holes were
created in the road. The Lord eventually arrived at a village named Ramkeli. This
village is situated on the border of Bengal and is very exquisite. While performing
Sankirtan in Ramakeli grama, the Lord danced and sometimes lost consciousness
due to love of God. While he was at Ramkeli-grama, an unlimited number of
people came to see His lotus feet. when the Mohammedan King of Bengal heard
of Mahaprabhu's influence in attracting innumerable people, he became very
astonished and began to speak as follows: "Such a persojn, who is followed by so
many people without giving them charity, must be a prophet. I can surely
understand this fact." The Mohammedan King ordered the magistrate: "Do not
disturb this Hindu prophet out of jealousy. Let Him do His own will wherever He
likes."
Mahaprabhu's auspicious visit was welcomed in Ramkeli, where all the
devotees became overwhelmed by ecstasy. From all directions came thousands of
people to see Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. When the King became a little

[p.274]
concrned about this phenomenon and began asking questions about Mahaprabhu,
his counselor, Keshava Chatri, who was a devotee, told him, "Yes, I have heard
about this mendicant sannyasi. He is begging here and there with three or four
followers." The king said, "What are you saying! Thousands and thousands of
people follow him wherever he goes." When he heard this, Keshava Chatri smiled
a little and intimated that this was a great exaggeration. Hearing the words of
Keshava Chatri, the Shah's mind was not pacified. He asked Rupa Goswami about
all this. Rupa Goswami said, "Why are you questioning me? Better that you
question your own mind. Because you are king of the people, you are the
representative of the Supreme Lord. Therefore you can understand better than I
who Chaitanya Mahaprabhu is." After hearing this, the Shah was pacified.
Beneath a tree on the banks of the Ganges, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
stopped to rest. He was accompanied only by his most intimate associates. In the
evening, Sanatana Goswami and Rupa Goswami arrived there. They met
Nityananda and Haridas Thakura who informed Mahaprabhu of their arrival. In
great humility, the two of them took bunches of straw between their teeth, and,
each binding a cloth around his neck, they ell down like rods before the Lord.
Upon seeing Mahaprabhu, Rupa and Sanatan were overjoyed and began to weep
out of humility. The Lord asked them to get up and blessed them. They arose
and, taking a straw between their teeth, they humbly offered their prayers with
folded hands. They said, "All glories to Shri Krishna Chaitanya, the most merciful
savior of the fallen souls. All glories to the Lord." Then they submitted
themselves, saying, "Sir, we belong to the lowest class of men, and our association

[p.275]
and occupation are also of the lowest type. Therefore we cannot introduce
ourselves to you. We feel very much ashamed standing here before you. Dear
Lord, you have incarnated to deliver the fallen souls. You should consider that in
this world there is none so fallen as us. You have delivered the two brothers Jagai
and Madhai, but to deliver them You did not have to exert yourself much. the
brothers Jagai and Madhai belonged to the brahmana caste, and their residence
was in the holy place of Nabadwipa. They never served low-class persons, nor
were they accesories to abominable persons. Jagai and Madhai had but one
fault—they were addicted to sin. However heaps of sin are burned to ashes simply
by Namabhasa: the dim reflection of the holy name. Jagai and Madhai uttered your
name in blasphemy, but their utterance of the divine name delivered them. We are
millions of times inferior to Jagai and Madhai. We are more degraded, fallen ad
sinful than they. Actually, we belong to the caste of meat-eaters, for we are
servants of meat-eaters. Because we associate with them we have become the
enemy of cows and brahmanas."
In this way, the two brothers humbly submitted that because of their
abominable activities they were now bound by the neck and hands by sin and
wallowing in the filthy ditch of sense gratification.
They continued their appeal to Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu: "No one in the
universe is powerful enough to deliver us. You are the savior of lost souls. Only
you can save us. If you deliver such fallen sinners as ourselves, the strength of
your mercy will become famous throughout the world. You have come to save the
most fallen. We are the most fallen. If you show your mercy to us, then, the

[p.276]
power of your mercy will be witnessed by everyone and your mission to save the
most fallen will be a great success. Although we are unqualified to receive your
mercy, still it is our heart's desire."
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu said, "My dear Dabhir Khasa and Sakara
Mallika: you two are my old servants. From this day on your names will be Rupa
and Sanatana. Now please give up this display of humility, for it breaks my heart.
You have written me many kind and humble letters, from which I could
understand all about you. In order to instruct you I sent you a verse that read: 'If a
woman has a paramour she will perform her household duties even more carefully
before, so that no one will know, all the while thinking of her paramour and
relishing that mellow within her heart.' My only business in coming to Bengal was
to see the two of you. Everyone asks why I have come to Ramakeli. No one
knows that I have come here only to see you. It is well that you have come to visit
me. Now you may return to your homes. Have no fear of anything: birth after
birth you have been my eternal servants. I am sure that Krishna shall soon deliver
you."
The Lord then blessed them by placing his hands on their heads. Sri
Rupa and Sri Sanatana then touched the Lord's lotus feet to their heads. When all
the devotees saw the Lord's mercy upon Rupa and Sanatana they became joyful
and began chanting the holy name of Hari. Many of the Lord's personal associates
were there, including Nityananda, Haridas Thakura, Shrivasa Thakura, Gadadhara
Pandit, Mukunda, Jagadananda, Murari, and Vakreshvara Pandit. Following the
Lord's instructions, Shri Rupa and Shri Sanatana touched the holy feet of all these

[p.277]
great devotees, who became exceedingly happy and congratulated the two brothers
for attaining the Lord's mercy. At this time Shri Vallabha also received the mercy
of the Lord and became known as Anupama. After taking permission from the
devotees there, Shri Rupa and Sanatana prepared to depart, but before doing so
submitted a proposal before the Lord's lotus feet.
They said, "O Lord, although the Ruler of Bengal, Hussein Shah, has some
regard for you, your mission here is now complete; thus we humbly request you to
depart, lest some misfortune befall you and the devotees. The king may have
some respect for you, but he is a meat-eater and a muslim and as such is naturally
inimical to the cows and brahmanas. He cannot be trusted for long. It is our
humble consideration that there is no need to go to Vrindavan with such a great
crowd. Vrindavan is a place of simplicity and rustic beauty, not pomp and
grandeur. We submit that it is best not to make a pilgrimage there with hundreds
and thousands of followers. "
After speaking in this way, Shri Rupa and Sanatana offered their respects
at the Lord's lotus feet and went home. Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu then made up
his mind to leave that village. The following morning he left for Kanai Natashala,
where he saw many of the paintings of Krishna's pastimes that were kept on
display there. That night he considered Sanatana's proposal not to go to
Vrindavan with a big crowd. He thought, "If I go to Vrindavana with so many
people, its mellow ambience of simplicity and rustic beauty will be ruined. I
should go alone or with one other person to Vrindavan. In that way, my
pilgrimage to Vrindavan will be very beautiful." Thinking in this way, the Lord

[p.278]
returned to Jagannatha Puri.
The Chaitanya Charitamrita (M.L. 19) describes how Sanatan Goswami
managed to free himself from his government duties and escape from prison to
join Shri Rupa in Vrindavan. On the plea of illness he left his post to study the
Bhagavata with devotees and brahmanas at his home. When a doctor brought this
to the Shah's attention, he went to Sanatana and demanded that he accompany him
to Orissa. When Sanatana refused he was imprisoned. Sanatana Goswami made
use of some money sent by Rupa Goswami and escaped by bribing his jailer. He
then left for Benares to meet Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. On the way Sanatan stopped
at a hotel with his servant Ishan, and after realizing that the hotel keeper planned
to kill them for gold in Ishan's possession, Sanatan made Ishan pay the hotel
keeper his last coin, and begged his help to pass through the jungle. The hotel
keeper was moved and, being the leader of the local dacoits, helped them through
the jungle and over the Hazaribag mountains. Parting company with Ishan, he
went on to meet his brother-in-law, Shri Kanta. Seeing that his brother had
become a fugitive and a mendicant, Shri Kanta asked Sanatan to stay with him,
but Sanatan refused. Upon the departure of Sanatana Goswami, Shri Kanta gave
his brother-in-law a fine woolen blanket.
Finally Sanatana reached Benares and met Shri Chaitanya at the house of
Chandreshekhara. The Lord ordered him to shave his beard and long hair, and so
Sanatana shaved his head and adopted the dress of a babaji, accepting some old
cloth from Tapan Mishra. When he could understand that the Lord disapproved of
a babaji in the dress of a mendicant wearing a fine and expensive woolen blanket,

[p.279]
he traded the blanket to a brahman he met at the Ganges in exchange for a torn
quilt. The Lord was pleased by Sanatana's humility and submission and instructed
him for some time on the science of devotion.
At that time, he elaborated on the position of the soul in the material
world and the soul's constitutional nature as an eternal servant of Krishna. He
explained the different energies of Krishna—svarupa-shakti, maya-shakti, and
tatastha-shakti. He described the relative positions of karma, jnana and bhakti by
relating the parable of Sarvajna, the astrologer. He showed how that all scriptures
have Krishna and his service as their aim. At that time Shri Chaitanya described
the consitutional position of Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He
discussed all the different forms, features, plenary expansions, and avatars of the
Lord. He explained the spiritual worlds of Goloka and Vaikuntha, and described
the Lord's opulence in Vaikutha and his sweetness in Vrindavana. the illusion of
Brahma was discussed. After this Chaitanya Mahaprabhu described the means of
attaining Krishna Prema. He described the two kinds of jivas and explained how
karma,jnana, and yoga divorced from bhakti are useless. He described the six
kinds of surrender and showed the worthlessness of Varnashram devoid of
Krishna. He spoke of the divine mercy of Krishna and explained how Krishna
appears as diskha-guru, shiksha-guru, and chaitya-guru in order to enlighten the
surrendered souls. He explained the development of faith, the three gradations of
devotees, the twenty-six qualities of a pure Vaishnava and the three characteristic
features of a true Vaishnava. Kindess as a primary feature of Vaishnavas was
described, using the examples of Haridasa Thakura and Vasudeva Datta.

[p.280]
Mahaprabhu explained that association with sadhus is indispensable to Krsihnabhakti and Krishna-preama, where bad association is detrimental to the growth of
divine love. The meaning of surrender and self-abnegation were discussed, as
were the characteristic features of a liberated soul.
At that time Mahaprabhu explained the two divisions of sadhana-bhakti:
Vaidhi-Sadhana-Bhakti and Raganuga-Sadhana-Bhakti. The sixty-four branches
of sadhana-bhakti were described with special emphasis on the five most
important: association with devotees, chanting of the holy name, hearing ShrimadBhagvatam, deity worship, and living in a holy place. The nine different methods
of devotion and the devotees who attained perfection in each of them were
discussed. After this the internal and external development of raganuga-sadhanabhakti was explained. After this bhava-bhakti and prema-bhakti were discussed
along with the nine stages of sadhana, the characteristics of a bhava-bhakta and the
characteristics of a prema-bhakta. At this time, the Lord explained the Sixty-four
qualities of Krishna, the meaning of true and false renunciation. He explained the
essential importance of associating with saints and, by way of illustration, told the
story of Narada and the hunter. In this way, Shri Chaitanya mahaprabhu explained
the transcendental position of Krishna, the nature of the jiva, the nature of
devotional service, and the ultimate perfection of love of Godhead. He also
explained the atmarama verse of Shrimad Bhagavatam in sixty-one different ways.
After enlightening Sanatana in all the truths of bhakti, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu ordered him to write books on devotional service, to establish the
proper practices and behavior for devotees, to install deities and reveal the proper

[p.281]
methods of deity worship, and to excavate the lost holy places of pilgrimage in
Vrindavana.

The books of Sanatana Goswami

Among the importan books compiled by Sanatana Goswami is the HariBhakti-Vilasa, which explains the proper duties and correct behavior for
Vaishnavas. In the Chaitanya-charitamrita, Krishna dasa Kaviraja Goswami
records Mahaprabhu's instructions to Sanatana on compiling Hari-Bhakti-Vilasa.
Kaviraja Goswami writes (CC ML 29.326-345): "Folding his hands, Sanatana
Goswami said, 'My Lord, you ordered me to write a directory about the activities
of Vaishnavas. I am a most lowborn person. I have no knowledge of good
behvior. How is it possible for me to write authorized directions about Vaishanva
activities?' Sanatana Goswami then requested the Lord, 'Please personally tell me
how I can write this difficult book about Vaishhava behavior. Please manifest
yourself within my heart. If you would please manifest yourself within my heart
and personally direct me in writing this book, then, although I am lowborn, I may
hope to be able to write it. You can do this because You are the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Yourself, and whatever You direct is perfect.'
"Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu replied, 'Whatever you want to do you will
be able to do correctly by Lord Krishna's favor. He will manifest the real purport.
Because you asked me for a synopsis, please hear these few indications. In the
beginning one must take shelter of a bona fide spiritual master. In your book there

[p.282]
should be the characteristics of the bona fide guru and the bona fide disciple.
Then, before accepting a spiritual master, one can be assured of the spiritual
master's position. Similarly the spiritual master can also be assured of the
disciple's position. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krishna, should be
described as the worhsipable object, and you should consider the bija-mantra for
the worship of Krishna, Rama or any other expansion of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. You should discuss the qualifications necessary for receiving a
mantra, the perfection of the mantra, the purification of the mantra, initiation,
morning duties, remembrance of the Supreme Lord, cleanliness, and washing the
mouth and other parts of the body. In the morning one should regularly brush his
teeth, take his bath, offer prayers to teh Lord and offer obeisances to the spiritual
master. One should render service to the spiritual master and paint one's body in
twelve places with tilaka. One should stamp the holy names of the Lord on his
body, or one should stamp the symbols of the Lord, such as the disc and club.
After this, you should describe how one should decorate his body with
gopicandana, wear neck beads, collect tulasi leaves from the tulasi tree, cleanse his
closth and the altar, cleanse one's own house or apartment and got to the temple
and ring the bell just to draw the attention of Lord Krishna. Also describe Deity
worship, wherein one should offer food to Krishna at least five times daily. One
should in due time place Krishna on a bed. you should also describe the process
for offering arati and the worship of the Lord according to the list of five, sixteen,
of fifty ingredients. The characteristics of the Deities should be discussed as well
as the characteristics of the shalagrama shila. One should also discuss visiting the

[p.283]
Deities in the temple and touring holy places like Vrindavana, Mathura and
Dvaraka. You should glorify the holy name and explain the importance of
carefully giving up offenses when chanting the holy name. You should explain
the symptoms of a Vaishnava and how to give up all kinds of seva-aparadha,
offenses in Deity worship. The items of worship, such as water, conchshell,
flowers, incense and lamp, should be described. You should also mention chanting
softly, offering prayers, circumambulating, and offering obeisances. All these
should be carefully studied. Other items to be considered are the method of
performing purascharana,taking Krishna-prasada, giving up the eating of
unoffered food and not blaspheming the Lord's devotees. One should know the
symptoms of a devotee and how to associate with devotees. One should know how
to satisfy the devotee by rendering service, and one should know how to give up
the association of nondevotees. One should also regularly hear the recitation of
Srimad-Bhagvatam. You should describe the ritualistic duties of every day, and
you should describe the fortnightly duties—especially observing Ekadashi fast,
which comes every fortnight. You should also describe the duties of every month,
especially the observance of cermonies like Janmastami, Ramanavami and
Nrsimha-caturdasi. You should recommend the performance of pure Ekadashi.
Whatever you say about Vaishanva behavior, the establishment of Vaishnava
temples and Deities and everything else should be supported by evidence from the
Puranas. You should give general and specific instructions of the behavior and
activities of a Vaishnava. You should outline things that are to be done and things
that are not to be done. All this should be described as regulations and etiquette. I

[p.284]
have thus given a synopsis of the Vaishanva regulative principles. I have given
this in brief just to give you a little direction. When you write on this subject,
Krishna wil help you by spiritually awakening you."
Hari-Bhakti-Vilasa is based on notes collected by Gopal Bhatta Goswami
and is known as a vaishnava srmiti. If one examines its content, one will see that
its content closely conforms to the instructions given Sanatana Goswami by Shri
Chaitanya. Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami summarizes its contents as follows:This
vaishnava-smriti-grantha was finished in twenty chapters, known as vilasas. In the
first vilasa there is a description of how a relationship is established between the
spiritual master and the disciple, and mantras are explained. In the second vilasa,
the process of initiation is described. In the third vilasa, the methods of Vaishanva
behavior are given, with emphasis on cleanliness, constant remembrance of of the
Supreme Personality fo Godheaed, and the chanting of the mantras given by the
initiating spiritual master. In the fourth filasa are descriptions of samskara, the
reformatory method; tilaka, the application of twelve tilakas on twelve places of
the body; mudra, marks on the body; mala, chanting with beads; and guru-puja,
worship of the spirtiual master. In the fifth vialasa, one is instructed on how to
make a place to sit for meditaqtion, and there are descriptions of breathing
exercises, meditation and worship of hte shalagram-shila representation of Lord
Vishnu. In the sixth vilasa, the required practices for inviting the transcendental
form of the Lrod and bathing Him are given. In the seventh vilasa, one is
instructed on how to collect flowers used for the worship of Lord Vishnu. In the
eight vilasa, there is a description of the Deity and instructions on how to set up

[p.285]
incense, light lamps, make offerings, dance, play music, beat drums, garland the
Deity, offer prayers and obeisances and counteract offenses. In the ninth vilasa,
there are descriptions of the devotees of the Lord (Vaishnavasa or saintly persons).
In the eleventh vilasa, there are elaborate descriptions of Deity worship and the
glories of the holy name of the Lord. One is instructed on how to chant the holy
name of the Deity, and there are discussions about offenses committed while
chanting the holy name, along with methods for getting relief from such offenses.
There are also descriptions of the glories of devotional service and the
surrendering process. In the twelfth vilasa, Ekadashi is described. In the
thirteenth vilasa, fasting is discussed, as well as observance of the Maha-dvadashi
ceremony. In the fourteenth vilasa, different duties for different months are
outline. In the fifteenth vilasa, there are instructions on how to observe Ekadashi
fasting without even drinking water. There are also descriptions of branding the
body with the symbols of Vishnu, and discussions of Caturmasya observations
during the rainy season, and iscussions of Janmashtami, Parsviakadashi, Shravanadvadashi, Rama-navami, and Vijayi-dashami. The sixteenth vilasa discusses
duties to be observed in the month of Karttika (October-November), or the
Damodara month, or Urja, when lamps are offered in the Deity room or above the
temple. There are also descriptions of the Govardhana-puja and Ratha-yatra. The
seventeenth vilasa discusses preparations for Deity worship, maha-mantra
chanting and the process of japa. In the eighteenth vilasa the different forms of
Shri Vishnu are described. The nineteenth vilasa discusses the establishment of
the Deity and the rituals observed in bathing the Deity before installation. The

[p.286]
twentieth vilasa discusses the construction of temples, referring to those
constructed by the great devotees. Shri Santana Goswami's commentary on HariBhakti-Vilasa is called the Dig-Darhsini-Tika. Sri A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada writes of Hari-Bhakti-Vilasa: “Another famous book by Sanatana
Goswami is the Hari-bhakti-vilasa, which states the rules and regulations for all
divisions of Vaishnavas, namely Vaishnava householders, Vaishnava brahmacaris,
Vaishnava vanaprasthas and Vaishnava sannyasis.“ Prabhupada notes, “This book
was especially written, however, for Vaishnava householders.”
Among the most important books compiled by Sanatana Goswami is the
Brihad-Bhagavatamritam. Whereas the Hari-Bhakti-Vilas expands on
Mahaprabhu's teachings to Sanatana regarding Vaishanva behavior and ritual,
Brihad-Bhagavatamrita analyses the ontology and metaphysics of Mahaprabhu's
teachings. In Brihad-Bhagavatamritam, Sanatana Goswami records the
conversation that took place between Pariksit Maharaja and his mother Uttara after
he had heard the Bhagavata from Shukadeva. She asks him to explain the gist of
the Bhagavatam, and Pariksit Maharaja begins by telling the story of Narada's
search for the most fortunate and intimate devotee of Krishna. This part of the
conversation reveals the gradation of intimacy in devotional service. Progressing
from those devotees whose bhakti is mixed with karma (Brahma) and jnana
(Shiva), Narada progresses to shanta-rasa (Prahlada) dasya-rasa (Hanuman)
sakhya-rasa (Arjuna) and finally to Krishna's dearmost devotee Uddhava, who
aspires for a position in Vrindavan and who reveals the love of the gopis for
Krishna as the last word in bhakti.

[p.287]
Part Two of Brihad-Bhagavtamrita reveals the story of gopa-kumara, an
errant cowherd boy who, having received mantra initiation from a resident of
Vrindavan, passes through one planetary system after the next, exploring different
levels of consciousness in a spritual odyssey that takes him from earth, through the
heavenly planets to Brahmaloka, Viraja, the brahmajyoti, Shivaloka, Vaikuntha,
Ayodhya, Dwarka, Mathura, and finally Goloka, where he realizes his eternal
position in the pastimes of Krishna in sakhya rasa. In Brihad-Bhagavatamritam
there are descriptions of devotees, intimate devotees, most intimate devotees and
complete devotees. About this book, Sri A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
writes (CC Adi 5.203), “Sri Santana Gosvami Prabhu, the teacher of the science of
devotional service, wrote several books, of which the Brhad-bhagavatamrta is very
famous; anyone who wants to know about the subject matter of devotees,
devotional service and Krishna must read this book.” According to Sri
Bhaktivedanta Swami, "The second part describes the glories of the spiritual
world, known as Goloka-mahatmya-nirupana, as well as the process of
renunciation of the material world. It also describes real knowledge, devotional
service, the spiritual world, love of Godhead, attainment of life's destination and
the bliss of the spiritual world. In this way there are seven chapters in each part,
fourteen chapters in all." Sanatana Goswami Prabhu also represents the teachings
of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in his commentary on Shrimad-Bhagavatam. Of
this commentary, Sri Bhaktivedanta Swami writes, "Dasama-tippani is a
commentary on the Tenth Canto of Shrimad-Bhagavatam. Another name for this
commentary is Brihad-vaishnava-toshani-tika. In the Bhakti Ratnakara it is said

[p.288]
that Dasama-tippani was finished in 1476 Sakabda...Sanatana goswami gave his
[Brihad] Vaishanva-tosani commentary to Srila Jiva Goswami for editing, and
Shrila Jiva Goswami edited this under the name of Laghu-tosani. Whatever he
immediately put down in writing was finished in the year 1476 Saka. Jiva
Goswami completed Laghu-tosani in the year Sakabda 1504. Sanatana Goswami
also composed Krishna-lila-stava which is known as Dashama-charit and
describes the pastimes of Krishna up to Mathura.” Elsewhere (CC Adi 5.203) Srila
Prabhupada writes of Dasama-tipanni, “Sanatana Goswami also wrote a special
commentary on the Tenth Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam known as the Dasamatipanni, which is so excellent that by reading it one can understand very deeply the
pastimes of Krsna in His exchanges of loving activities.”
After meeting with Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, and receiving the
instructions that would form the basis for the scriptures he would later compile,
Sanatana Goswami went to Vrindvan by the main road, and when he reached
Vrindavan he met Subuddhi Raya. When he arrived in Vrindavan, he found that
Rupa Goswami had already left. He then went to Jagannatha Puri through
Jharikhanda, the Uttara Pradesh jungle. After contracting a skin disease he felt to
be offensive to the Lord's touch, he decided to give up his life by falling beneath
the wheels of the Jaganatha Ratha-Yatra cart, but Chaitanya Mahaprabhu
expressed his disapproval of suicide and saved Sanatana through his mercy. Later
Sanatana Goswami met Haridas Thakura and heard from him of the disappearance
of his brother Anupama.
The Chaitanya Charitamrita records how, while in Jagannatha Puri,

[p.289]
Sanatana Goswami described the glories of Haridasa Thakura. When Jagadananda
Pandit granted Sanatana permission to leave for Vrindavan, Shri Chaitanya
disapproved, and glorified the qualities of Sanatana Goswami, ordering Sanatana
Goswami to remain in Jagannatha Puri for a year. Later, when Jagadananda
Pandit went to Vrindavan, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu put him under the
guidance of Sanatana Goswami. At that time, Jagadananda Pandit became angry
with Sanatana for wearing a turban made from a piece of red cloth given him by a
sannyasi other than Shri Chaitanya, but was pacified by Sanatana's deep devotion.
(At that time, Sanatana remarked that red cloth is unfit for Gaudiya Vaishnava
Sannyasis, since it is worn by the Mayavadi followers of Shankaracarya's
impersonal school. Since that time, out of respect for the words of Sanatana
Goswami, Gaudiya Vaishnava Sannyasis have adopted the color saffron for the
dress of renunciation.) When Sanatana Goswami finally returned to Vrindavan, he
was reunited with Rupa Goswami, and the two of them remained there to execute
the orders of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.

Sanatana Goswami and Madana Mohan

The Bhakti-Ratnakara describes how Sanatana began the worship of his MadanaMohan deity. Among Mahaprabhu's orders to Sanatana was his instruction to
establish the worship of the Deity of Krishna. The Bhakti Ratnakara how Shri
Sanantana Goswami, when he was staying in Vrindavan, began the worship of
Shri Madana-Mohan, also known as Madana Mohana. In Mahavana, nearby

[p.290]
Krishna's birthplace in Vrindavana, Sanatana Goswami made a hut of grass.
There he would perform his daily bhajan. One day, as he went out begging, he
came to a small village on the banks of the Yamuna. At that time Madana Mohana
Dev was playing on the side of the river with some small gopa boys. When he
saw Santana, he cried out, "O Father! Baba!" With this, he came running after
Santana Goswami and grabbed hold of his hand, saying, "Take me with you. I
want to go with you."
"Little boy, why do you want to go with me?"
"I want to stay with you."
"If you stay with me, what will you eat?"
"What do you eat?"
"Only some dry chapatis and coarse rice."
"Then I will also eat that, Baba."
"Even if you could eat like that, you can't stay with me. You must stay with your
mother and father."
"But, Baba! I want to stay with you."
Making the boy understand his wishes, Sanatana sent him home, and then
continued his begging rounds.
That night, the boy appeared to him in a dream. In the dream, the boy was
laughing again and again. He took hold of Sanatana's hand and told him, "Baba!
My name is Madana Mohana. Tomorrow I shall come to you." Saying this,
Madana Mohana disappeared, and with this Sanatana awoke. He was so overcome
by ecstasy that he felt as if his soul had been stolen from his body. He thought,

[p.291]
"What have I seen? I have never seen such a beautiful boy. His mind was filled
with remembrance of Shri Hari. When he opened the door to his kutir, he found
that standing in the doorway was a wonderful murti of Shri Madana Mohanaa.
That deity was so beautiful that it filled the four directions with its effulgence.
Sanatana Goswami was stunned for some time, but after a while, he came
to his senses, and at that time, his eyes filled with tears of ecstasy which gradually
wet the earth beneath him. After this, he began the worship of the deity by
performing an abhisheka ceremony. When Rupa Goswami saw that wonderful
deity, he was filled with prema.
Shri Sanatana used to serve that deity in his own humble grass hut. Shri
Rupa Goswami sent word of these auspicious events to Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu in Jagannatha Puri by messenger.
After begging all day, Shri Sanatana Goswami would return to his grass
hut in the evening and offer some dry chapatis to his deity, Madana-Gopala.
Sometimes he would also prepare some shak or other vegetables to go with it. In
any case, he would never prepare any vegetables with oil or salt. Most of the time
he could only offer chapatis. As a result, Sanatana would become sorrowful,
thinking himself unfit to properly worship the deity. But he couldn't afford it,
because Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had given him a service: to compose devotional
scriptures. At the same time he had to spend all day collecting alms. When could
he find the time to go out and beg for oil and salt? Shri Sanatana Goswami's mind
was filled with grief. As Paramatma, the Lord knew Sanatana's mind. Madana
Mohanaa thought to himself, "I am eating dry chapatis, and Sanatana's mind is

[p.292]
very unhappy as a result. He wants to serve me in royal style. As a result he feels
that his service is of no use.
At that time there was a wealthy merchant of the kshatriya caste named
Shri Krishna Das Kapoor. He was on his way to Mathura to do some business. He
was coming down the Yamuna in a big boat. When his boat became stuck on a
sandbar, and he could see no way to continue, he began to think "What can we do
now?" At that time Krishna das Kapoor heard from the local people that there was
a big sadhu living in Vrindavan who could help. His name was Sanatana
Goswami. When Krishna Dasa Kapoor came to see him, Sanatana was sitting in
his hut, writing, wearing only a loincloth, his body lean from austerity and
renunciation. Sanatana offered his visitor a grass mat as a seat, and touching
Krishna das Kapoor with his hand, bade him sit. At this, Krishna Das Kapoor
said, "Baba! give me your mercy."
Sanatana said, "I am only a beggar. What kind of mercy can I give you?"
"I only pray for your blessings. My boat is stuck on a sandbar in the Yamuna river
and I can see no way to free it."
"I know nothing about it. Explain it all to Madana Mohana."
Krishna Das Kapoor offered his dandavats before the Madana Mohana deity and
said, "O Madana Mohana dev! If you give me your mercy and free my boat, then
whatever profit I make from this business I will give it to you for your seva."
With this prayer, Kapoor asked permission to leave. That day a big storm
came and rain poured from the heavens, raising the level of the Yamuna's waters.
As the waters grew higher and higher, Kapoor's boat was freed from the sandbar

[p.293]
and began making its way down the Yamuna. Krishna das Kapoor could
understand that this was all the mercy of Madana Mohana. He had made a
handsome profit on his cargo, and donated it all to build a lavish temple for Shri
Madana Mohana, including a bhogashala where first-class edibles could be stored
for the pleasure of the Lord. From that time on, Madana Mohana was served in
royal style. Seeing this royal service of Madana Mohana, Sanatana Goswami
became very happy. Soon after this, Sanatana Goswami accepted Krishna das
Kapoor as his disciple and gave him initiation. The Madana Mohan temple still
stands today, and is an important place of pilgrimage for all Gaudiya Vaishnavas.
In discussing the importance of the Madana Mohan Deity, Bhaktivedanta
Swami writes, "Srila Sanatana Goswami is the ideal spiritual master, for he
delivers one the shelter of the lotsu feet of Madana Mohana. Even though one may
be unable to travel on the field of Vrindavan due to forgetfulness of his
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he can get an adquate
opportuinty to stay in Vrindavana and dreive all spiritual benefits by the mercy of
Sanatana Goswami." Similarly, Krishna das Kaviraj Goswami prays, "jayatam
suratau pangor, mama manda-mater gati, mat-sarvasva-padambhojau, radhamadana-mohanau": Glory to the all merciful Radha-Madana-Mohana! I am lame
and ill-advised, yet they are my directors, and Their lotus feet are everything to
me." Kaviraja Goswami also says, "These three Deities of Vrindavan [Madanamohana, the Deity of Sanatana Goswami, Govinda, the deity of Rupa Goswami,
and Gopinatha, the Deity of Raghunataha Das Goswami] have absorbed the heart
and soul of the Gaudiya Vaishanvas, [followers of Lord Chaitanya]. I worship

[p.294]
their lotus feet, for they are the Lods of my heart." (CC AL 1.19) Translating the
commentary of Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Prabhupada, Sri Bhaktivedanta
Swami writes:

"The author of Shri Chaitanya Charitamrita offers his

respectful obeisances unto the three Deities of Vrindavan named Shri Radhamadana-Mohana, Shri Radha-Govinda-deva, and Shri Radha-Gopinathaji. These
three Deities are the life and sol of the Bengali Vaishanvas, or Gaudiya
Vaishanvas, who have a natural aptitude for residing in Vrindavana. The Gaudiya
Vaishnavas who follow strictly in the line of Shri Chaitanya Mahrapabhu worhsip
the Divinity by chanting transcendental sounds meant to develop a sense of one's
transcendental relationship wit the Supreme Lord, a reciprocation of mellows
(rasas) of mutual affection, and ultimately, the achievement of the desired success
in loving service. These three Deities are worshiped in three different stages of
one's development. The followers of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu scrupulously
follow these principles of approach.
"Gaudiya Vaishanvas perceive the ultimate objective in Vedic hymns
composed of eighteen transcendental letters that adore Krishna as Madana-mohan,
Govinda, and Gopijanavallabha. Madana-mohana is He who charms Cupid, the
god of love, Govinda is He who pleases the senses and the cows, and
Gopijanavallbhais the transcendental lover of the gopis. Krishna Himself is called
Madana-mohana, Govinda, Gopijanavallbha and countless other names as He
plays in His different pastimes with His devotees.
"The three Deities—MadanaMohana, Govinda, andGopijanavallabha—have
very specific qualities. Worhsip of Madana-mohana is on the platform of

[p.295]
reestablishing our forgotten relationship wioth the Personality of Godhead. In the
beginning of our spiritual life we must worship Madana-mohana so that He may
attract us and nullify our attachment for material sense gratification. This
relationship with Madana-mohana is necessary for neophyte devotees. When one
wishes to render service to the Lord with strong attachment, one then worships
Govinda on the platform of transcendental service. Govinda is the reservoir of all
pleasures. When by the grace of Krishna and the other devotees one reaches
perfeciton in devotional service, he can appreciate Krishna as Gopijanavallabha
[Gopinatha], the pleasure Deity of the damsels of Vraja.
"Lord Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu explained this mode of devotional
service in three stages, and therefore these worshipable Deities were installed in
Vrindavan by different Goswamis. They are very dear to the Gaudiya Vaishnavas
there, who visit the temples at least once a day."
Bhaktivedanta Swami gives further understanding on this subject in his
introduction to the Chaitanya Charitamrita: "In Chaitanya Charitamrita,
Krishnadas first offers his obeisances to Madana-mohan vigraha [Santana
Goswami's Deity], the Deity who can help us progress in Krishna consciousness.
In the execution of Krishna consciousness, our first business is to know Krishna
and our relationship with Him. To know Krishna is to know one's self and to know
one's self is to know one's relationship with Him. Since this relationship can be
learned by worhsiping Madana-mohana-vigraha, Krishnadas Kaviraj first
establishes his relationship with HIm.
"When this is established, Krishnadas begins to worship the functional

[p.296]
Deity, Govinda [Rupa Goswami's Deity]. ..Krishnadas Kaviraja Goswami
maintains that the Radha and Krishna Deities [Radha-Govinda] show us how to
serve Radha and Krishna. The madana-mohana Deities simply establish that "I am
your eternal servant." With Govinda, however, there is actual acceptance of
service, and therefore he is called the functional Deity. The Gopinatha Deity is
Krishna as master and proprietor of the gopis. He attracted all the gopis or
cowherd girls by the sound of his flute, and when they came, he dance with them...
Krishna is therefore called Gopinatha because He is the beloved master of the
gopis."
This progression—Krishna or Madana-Mohana, Radha-Govinda, RadhaGopinatha—is also found in the three key words of the eighteen syllable Krishna
gayatri. This is explained in Jiva Goswami's remarks on the Gayatri mantram,
found in his commentary on the Brahma-Samhita which is translated by Shrila
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura. There, Jiva Gosami explains that the mantram
has six elements, and that "Krishnaysa," in the mantram refers to Krishna-svarupa,
or in Srila Bhaktisiddhanta's language, "the proper self of Krishna." [MadanaMohana]. The second element in the mantram, or the second aspect of Krishan to
be revealed [Govinda] is "krishnasya chinmaya vraja-lila-avilasa-svarupa": "the
true nature of Krishna's pastimes in Vrindavana. The third aspect of Krishna is
Gopijanavallabha, [Gopinatha] Krishna who is dear to the gopis.
It is therefore said that in the mantram "Klim Krishnaya, Govindaya,
Gopijanavallabhaya, etc..." "Krishnaya" is Madana-Mohana, the first object of
worship represented in sambandha-jnana, whose acharya is Shri Sanatana

[p.297]
Goswami. "Govindaya" is the Lord who is surrounded by his intimate serving
group. Because Govinda accepts one's service, He is the deity of abidheya-tattva,
whose acharya is Rupa Goswami. "Gopijanavallabhaya" in the mantram refers to
Gopinatha, the master of the great rasa dance in which all the gopis take part. This
represents the ultimate goal, or prayojana, whose acharya is Raghunatha das
Goswami. Raghunatha das Goswami, the acharya of the highest goal of life,
accepts the lotus feet of Shri Rupa (the abidheaya acharya) as his highest
aspiration and thus shows us the path to the highest goal. Rupa Goswami in his
turn always offers his respects to Sanatana Goswami (the sambandha acharya),
whom he considered to be his spiritual master.
In his commentary on the talks betwen Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and
Ramananda Raya, Bhaktivinoda Thakura elaborates further on this theme.
Bhaktividanta Swami translates his commentary as follows: "In the mantra: klim
kamadevaya vidmahe pushpabanaya dhimahi tan no nangah prachodayat, Krishna
is called Kamadeva or Madana-mohana, the Deity who establishes our relationship
with Krishna. Govinda, or pushpa-bana, who carries an arrow made of flowers, is
the Personality of Godhead who accepts our devotional service. Ananaga or
Gopijanavallabha, satisfies all the gopis and is the ultimate goal of life."
Bhaktivinoda Thakura, in his Anubhashya commentary on Chaitanya
Charitamrita, further explains this version on the basis of Jiva Goswami's
comments on the Brahma-samhita verse: atha venuninadasya trayimurtimayi gatih,
sphuranti praviveshashu mukhabjani sarojajah. This verse describes how the
flutesong of Shri Krishna was heard by Brahma as the Gayatri mantram. Shrila

[p.298]
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura translates "trayimurti gatih" to mean that the
gayatri is "the mother of the three Vedas." Bhaktivinoda explains that in this verse,
the words "trayimurti gatih" means that the sound emanating from the flutesong of
Shri Krishna, or Gayatri is the basis of sambandha, abhidheya and prayojana. He
says that "trimurtimayi" also indicates the three murtis Madana-mohana, Govinda,
and Gopinatha. Upon hearing this sound, Brahma became initiated as a twiceborn, and became acquainted with the ocean of truth (sambandha, abhidheya,
prayojana), after which he uttered the famous "Govinda" prayers beginning with
"chintamani prakara-sadmasu." Bhaktivinoda Thakura supports this view by
quoting at length from Brahma-Samhita, Jiva Goswami's commentary,
Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakrua, and the Gopal Tappani Upanishad, which all
corroborate the above version.
It is clear from the above that Sanatana Goswami occupies a special
position in the Gaudiya Vaishnava Sampradaya. He is the acharya of sambandhajnana, or knowledge of our proper devotional relationship with Krishna. Moreover
his deity, Madana-mohan, helps us to overcome the influence of the senses and fix
our minds in devotional service. Sanatana Goswami's literatures are a storehouse
of nectar. His personal example of humility is beyond description. He is an
intimate associate of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Radha-Krishna, and the
guru of Shrila Rupa Goswami. Let us all pray for the shelter of his lotus feet.

Radharani appears to Shri Sanatana

[p.299]
In Bhakti-Ratnakara, it is written that one day Sanatana Goswami went to
Radha-Kunda to see Shri Rupa and Shri Raghunataha Dasa Goswami. When they
saw Sanatana approaching, they rose to offer him respect, and then offered him a
seat. With this, the three of them began an ishta-gosthi, a discussion about
Krishna. Shri Rupa Goswami had written a Stotram to Radharani called "ChatuPushpanjali"—an offering of four flowers. Shri Sanatana Goswami read the
verses, and was struck by one in particular:

navagorochana gauri, pravarendi varamvaram,
manistavaka-vidyoti-veni-vyalangana-phanam

"O Vrindabaneshvari! I offer my respects unto you. Because your complexion is
like newly molten gold, you are known as Gaurangi. Your dress is beautiful like
that of a blue lotus. Your long braid of hair resembles a black serpent decorated
with jewels." When Sanatana saw the line, "Your braided hair resembles a black
serpent..." he thought about this comparison and said, "Is this a logical or
reasonable metaphor? To compare Radharani's hair to a serpent?"
That afternoon Shri Sanatana went to Radha Kunda to take his bath. After
offering different reverential prayers to the Radha Kunda, he took his bath there.
At that time, a little distance from the Kunda, he could see some gopi boysa dn
girls playing, at the foot of some trees. As he glanced in their direction, he could
just make out that right behind the head of one of the girls was what might have
been a long, black, dangling braid, but looked to Sanatana Goswami much more

[p.300]
like a deadly snake, swaying back and forth as if ready to strike. At that time he
called out, "O young girl! Be careful: there is a snake creeping up on your back!"
The young girl, caught up in the joy of her playing, took no notice. Apparently
she couldn't hear him. Thereupon he went running up to her and saw that the girl
was none other than Shri Radha Thakurani. When the gopas and gopis saw him,
they burst out laughing. They laughed and laughed for some time without
stopping. Shri Sanatana Goswami was struck dumb. After this, he could
understand the logic of Shri Rupa Goswami's metaphor.

Krishna brings milk

The Bhakti Ratnakara records how once Shri Sanatana Goswami was alone
in the forest on the banks of the Pavana Sarovara performing his bhajan in a
secluded place. He had been fasting from food and drink. As he is the supersoul in
all living beings, the Lord could understand everything. He thought, "My devotee
is starving. I cannot tolerate this." In the dress of a gopa, Krishna entered the
forest where Sanatana was staying, carrying a pot of milk. He came before
Sanatana and said, "Baba! I have brought you some milk."
Sanatana said, "Why have you brought me milk?"
"You are not eating properly, that's why."
"How did you know that I am not eating anything?"
"Many gopas have come and gone by here. They told me you have not been
eating."

[p.301]
"Why didn't they come?"
"They have much work at home, so they sent me."
"You are such a little boy, by have you taken so much trouble for me?"
"No, no, father. It is no trouble at all."
Taking the pot of milk, Sanatana said, "Sit down, little boy. I will finish the milk
and give you back your pot."
"No baba. I cannot sit with you. I have to milk the cows. I will come and fetch the
pot tomorrow." Saying this, the boy vanished, and Shri Sanatana became
speechless. He could understand that all this was the work of Krishna. He began
to drown in the tears that poured from his eyes as he drank the milk. From that
day on he ate by practicing madhukari, or only accepting a tiny bit from many
different residents of Vrindavan. Gradually the residents of Vrindavan built him a
kutir so that he could stay there.

Accepting Service from Shri Radha

One day Shri Rupa Goswami wanted to prepare some sweet rice for Sanatana
Goswami, but didn't have the necessary provisions for making sweet rice in his
kutir. At that time, she who brings about the fulfillment of the inner aspiration of
devotees, Shrimati Radha Thakurani, could understand everything. And so, in the
dress of a young gopi girl she brought milk, rice, and sugar to Rupa Goswami,
saying, "Swamiji! Swamiji! I have brought you a gift of uncooked rice. Please
accept it. Hearing the words of the young girl, Shri Rupa Goswami opened the

[p.302]
door to his hut and looked out. There he saw a beautiful young gopi maiden with
some offerings of food. Rupa Goswami said, "Little girl! Whay have you come
here?"
"Swamiji! I have only brought you some simple uncooked food."
"Why have you taken such trouble for me?"
"Baba! What trouble? I have only come to render a humble service to a saintly
person."
Accepting the offering of milk, sugar and uncooked rice, Rupa Goswami said,
"Young girl please take your seat, while I put these things away." The girl said,
"I'm sorry, but I have some work to do." Saying this, the girl disappeared. When
Rupa Goswami turned around and saw that she had gone, he was very bewildered
by all this. At length, he prepared the sweet rice and offered the bhoga to his deity,
Govindadeva. After some time, he gave the prasada to Sanatana Goswami, who
had just arrived. While honoring prasada, Sanatana Goswami experienced an
unusual and enchanting kind of joy. He asked Shri Rupa, "Where did you get this
milk and rice from?" Rupa Goswami said, "A young gopi girl came by and gave it
to me." Sanatana said, "A young girl just came by all of a sudden and gave you
this milk and rice?" Rupa Goswami replied, "Yes, she just came by all of a
sudden. The strange thing is, I was just thinking, 'how can I make some sweet rice
for Sanatana,' and she just appeared, as if by magic, with this milk and rice and
some sugar." hearing this, tears of prema began falling from the eyes of Sanatana
Goswami. He said, "Can't you recognize something when it is right before your
eyes? It was Shri Radha Thakurani Herself who has brought you milk and rice. By

[p.303]
accepting service from Her we are ruined. Now we shall never attain our desired
goal." And in this way, Sanatana Goswami continually condemned himself again
and again for having accepted service from that person whom he most aspired to
serve: Shri Radha Thakurani. This pastime of Shri Sanatana Goswami is recorded
in the Bhakti Ratnakara.
The Bhakti-Ratnakara also records how, every day, Shri Sanatana
Goswami would make the four mile pilgrimage around Govardhan hill, but
because of his old age this was very troublesome. Still, he did not want to break
his religious principles by not circumambulating Govardhan hill. And so he would
suffer great physical hardship while circumambulating Govardhan. The Lord
knows everything and thus could understand the pain his devotee Sanatana was
experiencing. He decided to do something about this. One day, a little gopa boy
came to Sanatana and said, "Baba! You are old. Don't go to such trouble to walk
around Govardhan hill. Sanatan said, "This one of the regular principles of my
bhajan—I must maintain it." The boy said, "Since you are old, you may give now
up this rule." Sanatana said, "I will never give up my religious principles."
Krishna then told him, "Baba! Won't you honor my words?" Sanatana said, "If it
is honorable, then I shall honor it." At that time Krishna presented Sanatana
Goswami with a shila, a stone, bearing the meark of his own lotus feet, and said:
"This is Govardhan-shila, a piece of stone from Govardhan itself." Sanatana said,
"What shall I do with it?" Shri Krishna said, "If you circumambulate this
Govardhan-shila, your vow of walking all the way around Govardhan hill every
day will remain intact, for by circumambuting this, you cirucmumbulate

[p.304]
Govardhan Hill. You will thereby get the same result, keep your vow intact, and
not compromise your religious principles." Shri Sanatan Goswami was silenced.
He could understand that Giriraja himself had given him this shila. From that day
forward, he used to circumambulate the Govardhan-shila marked with the divine
marks of the lotus feet of Shri Krishna.
Following the orders of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Shri Rupa and Shri
Sanatana Goswami did not climb Govardhana hill because they considered it
nondifferent from Krishna, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. On some pretext,
the Gopal deity granted Shri Chaitanya mahaprabhu an audience beneath the hill,
and Gopala similarly favored Shrila Rupa and Sanatana Goswami. During his ripe
old age, when Rupa Goswami could not go to Govadhana Hill because of
invlaidity, Gopala kindly went to Mathura and remained at the temple of
Viththaleshavara for one month. It was then that Shrila Rupa Goswami could see
Gopala's beauty to his heart's content.
The activites of Shrila Rupa and Sanatana Goswami while they resided in
Vrindavan are described by Krishnadasa Kaviraja Goswami in the Chaitanya
Charitamrita (CC ML 19.128—132) as follows: "The brothers actually have no
fixed residence. They reside beneath trees—one night under one tree and the next
night under another. Shrila Rupa and Sanatana Goswami beg a little food from the
houses of brahmanas. giving up all kinds o material enjoyment, they only take
some dry bread and fried chick-peas. They carry only wterpots, and they wear torn
quilts. They always chant the holy names of Krishna and discuss his pastimes. In
great jubliation, they also dance. They engage almost twenty-four hours daily in

[p.305]
rendering service to the Lord. They usually sleep only an hour and ahalf, and some
days, when they continuously chant the Lord's holy name, they do not sleep at all.
Sometimes they write transcendental literatures about devotional service, and
sometimes they hear about Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and spend their time
thinking about the Lord. When the personal associates of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu would hear of the activities of Rupa and Santana Goswamis, they
would say, 'What is wonderful for a person who has been granted the Lord's
mercy?'"

Lives of the Saints
Saranga Thakura

Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami has written: “Ramadasa, Kavidatta, Sri
Gopala dasa, Bhagavat acarya, and Thakura Saranga dasa were all important
branches of the Sri Caitanya tree.” (C.C. adi 10.113)
Sri Saranga Murari Thakura is also sometimes known as Sarnga Murari,
Sarnga Pani, or Saranga Dhara. He lived on the banks of the Ganges in
Modradrumadvipa in Nabadwipa dhama in what is now known as Mamagacchi.
At present in that place there is a temple of Radha-Gopinatha. The old temple was
built next to an ancient Bakula tree that is supposed to have been standing since
the time of Saranga Thakura. Recently a new temple building has been

[p.306]
constructed there which is at present under the management of the Gaudiya Matha.
It is said that Saranga Murari Thakura had vowed never to accept any
disciples. But again and again he received some messages from Caitanya
Mahaprabhu encouraging him to make disciples. At length, he decided to accept a
disciple and said, “I shall make a disciple of the first person I see tomorrow and
shall initiate him into the mantra. The next morning he went to the Ganges to
bathe, and as he was bathing he touched a dead body with his foot. Grabbing hold
of the dead body, he brought it to life again and asked it, “Who are you? What is
your gotra?” The man gradually regained consciousness, and, finding himself in
the presence of a great soul, he bowed down before Saranga Thakura. At last the
man who had risen from the dead by the power of Saranga Thakura identified his
caste and family background, saying, “My name is Murari. Have mercy on me!”
At that time, Saranga Thakura accepted him as his disciple and gave him mantradiksa. It is for this reason that he became famous as Saranga Murari Thakura.
After a few days Saranga Thakura trained his new disciple in the worship of his
deities, Radha-Gopinatha. That disciple became famous as Murari Thakura.
According to Kavikarnapura's Gaura-ganodesa-dipika, “That person who
was formerly the gopi called Nandimukhi in Vraja-lila appeared in the pastimes of
Sri Caitanya as Saranga Thakura.”
Saranga Thakura's appearance day is on the fourteenth day of the dark
moon in the month of asadha and his disappearance day is on the thirteenth day of
the dark moon in the month of Agrahayana.

[p.307]
Shrinivasa Acharaya

Shrinivasa's father's name was Shri Gangadhara Bhattacharya. Later he
became known as Chaitanya Das. His wife's name was named Shri Laksmipriya.
He lived on the banks of the Ganges in a village called Chakhandi Gram.
When Shri Gaurasundara ended his Nabadwip lila he went to the ashram of
Keshava Bharati to accept sannyasa, news of their conversation was proclaimed
far and wide. From all around thousands and thousands of people to see the
sannyasa of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. At that time, from Chakhandi Gram
came Gangadhara. When Shri Nimai Pandit was about to have his beautiful hair
shaved off, all the devotees began weeping floods of tears.The barber was unable
to do the work of shearing the Lord's hair. His eyes filled with tears, and he was
unable to see. Mahaprabhu requested him to use the razor his hair. After some
time, Shri Madhu, the barber did the work of shaving the Lord's beautiful hair
from his head. The barber cried out in anguish, "What misery I have caused!
What have I done?" and fell unconscious upon the earth. A great uproar of
weeping and wailing filled all four directions. Who could console them? What a
pitiful sight. The men and women there were unable to speak, and seeing this
pitiful sight, the birds in the trees also fell silent.
Shri Gangadhara Bhattacharya's was shocked, and fainted upon seeing this
scene. When he arose again, he was half-mad. The only sound that issued from
his lips was "Shri Krishna Chaitanya, Shri Krishna Chaitanya." He returned to

[p.308]
Chakhandi Gram, but like a madman he would only go on chanting Shri Krishna
Chaitanya, Shri Krishna Chaitanya, again and again, softly to himself. His chaste
and faithful wife hearing of Mahaprabhu's sannyas began overflowing with tears.
All the brahmanas and their wives past their days weeping in great agony. In this
way the people of Nadia gave Gangadhara Bhattacharya the name "Caitanya das."
In order to take darshan of the lotus feet of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Chaitanya
Das went with his wife to Jagannatha Puri.
When Chaitanya Das finally arrived in Jagannatha Puri after such a long
journey and received darshan of the holy feet of Shri Chaitanya, Chaitanya Das
and his wife crying tears of joy, fell before the Lord and offered their obeisances.
Shri Chaitanya called them to his side and blessing them with his merciful glance
spoke the following sweet words: "Jagannatha is delighted that you have come
here. Go and take darshan of him. The lotus eyed Lord is ready to satisfy your
innermost heart's desire. The Lord is supremely merciful. In order to receive his
mercy, you have come a long way, and he wants to satisfy your heart's desire. Go
now and take darshan of Lord Jagannatha."
Shri Chaitanya Dasa and his wife went to take darshan of Jagannatha. The
Lord's personal servant, Govinda, went with them. The good brahman and
brahmani, upon seeing Lord Jagannatha wept tears of prema and offered many
prayers and hymns from the scriptures to the Lord. After this they followed the
directions the Lord had given them on where to stay, and went to the place he had
provided for their stay. For a few days, Shri Chaitanya Das in great happiness
remained in Jagannatha Puri.

[p.309]
One day, being the Paramatma in everyone's heart and therefore knowing
everything, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu told his servant, "Govinda! The desired
son of that brahmana and his wife shall soon appear. Shrinivasa will be his name,
and he will be a greatly beautiful child. Through Shri Rupa and Sanatana I will
manifest the bhakti-shastras. Through Shrinivas, all these shastras will be
distributed. Let that brahmana and his wife quickly return to Gauda Desh."
Receiving the auspicious blessings of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu with great
ecstasy, Shri Chaitanya das returned to Gauda Desh. Soon, within the womb of
the brahmana wife of Chaitanya Das, a child was conceived who embodied the
mercy potency of the Lord. Laksmipriya's father's name was Balaram Vipra. He
was a pandit and an astrologer expert in the Jyoti Shastras. He could understand
that from the womb of Lakshmipriya a great soul, a mahapurush, would soon take
birth. The Bhakti Ratnakara records that "On the full moon day in the month of
Vaishakha, in the constellation or naksatra of Rohini, when all the stars were
aligned in an auspicious way, Lakshmipriya gave birth to a son." The boy's bodily
luster was as brilliant as molten gold. He had a long nose, his eyes extended to his
ears, a broad chest, and arms that extended to his knees. In this way, he was seen
to manifest all the bodily symptoms of a mahapurush, or great soul.
Shri Chaitanya Das offered the boy to the lotus feet of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. At the beginning of their son's birthday celebration, they gave
profusely in charity to the brahmanas and their wives. All the brahmanas and their
wives took great pleasure in holding the newborn child. Finally, Lakshmipriya
herself took the child in her lap and Gaura-nam kirtana began. They taught the

[p.310]
boy to chant the holy name of Gauranga. Just as the moon grows from a tiny
crescent to its full and brilliant form, so the boy gradually grew up and became
more briliant with each passing day. Gradually his hair-cutting ceremony and
sacred thread ceremony came and went. After this time, he went to Shri
Dhananjaya Vidyavacaspati where he began studying grammar, poetry, rhetoric,
and shastra. Within a short time he became highly learned in all the different
subjects he was taught, and his vision into the revealed scriptures was
extraordinary.
When he was a small child, Shrinivasa received the mercy of Shri Govinda
Ghosh Thakura and Narahari Sarakara Thakura. After some time, Shrinvasa's
father passed away. At the disappearance of his father, Shrinivasa was devastated
with grief. All the devotees did their best to pacify him, but he was unconsolable
at the loss of his father. So bereaved was he that he would allow no food or drink
to pass through his lips, and in this way he fasted for some time.
Bidding farewell to the devotees there, Shrinvasa and his mother left
Chakhandi Gram, and after a few days, they arrived in Yajigram at the house of
Shri Balaram Vipra, Shrinvas's maternal grandfather. Hearing of Shrinviasa's
move to Yajigram the saintly persons who lived there became very happy. Seeing
Shrinvas's profound scholarship and bhakti-prema all the pandits and brahmanas
in Yajigrama were amazed. Still, the hankering within the heart of Shrinivasa was
unsatisfied. He could only think day and night of seeing the lotus feet of Shri
Chaitanya. By and by he grew very eager to go to Jagannatha Puri.
To take darshan of the holy feet of Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura,

[p.311]
Shrinivasa went to Shri Khanda. Arriving there, he fell at the feet of Narahari with
his mind filled with the ecstasy of love of Godhead and began rolling on the
ground, his voice choked with emotion. Seeing his wonderful love for Krishna,
Narahari embraced him. Shrinivasa was absorbed in remembrance of the holy
name of Shri Gauranga and wept tears of joy. Then he let Narahari know of his
aspiration to go to Jagannatha Puri to see the holy places of Shri Gauranga's lila.
Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura, Raghunandana Thakura, and some of the other
devotees who were there, upon listening to his proposal were very happy and said,
"You should wait here for a few more days. Soon many of the devotees from
Bengal will go to Puri. At that time you may go in their association.
Shrinivasaleft Shri Khanda and returned to Yajigram, where he told his
mother of his plans for a long journey to Jagannatha Puri with the devotees. Upon
hearing her son's wishes, and seeing that his mind was made up, she gave him her
blessings. A few days later he set out for Puri in the company of the devotees
from Bengal. Completely overwhelmed with internal joy, gradually reached
Jagannatha Puri in the afternoon. That night they stayed at the house of a panda
who lived near the simhadvara gates. The next morning he went to the house of
Gadadhara Pandit. Seeing the Pandit, Shrinivasa fell on the ground before his lotus
feet with tears in his eyes. Gadadhara Pandit affectionately took hold of him and
embraced him. As Shrinivasa was being embraced by Shri Gadadhara Pandit, he
wept in separation from Shri Gauranga.
After staying in the house of Gadadhara Pandit for a day, Shrinivasa went
to take darshan of Ramananda Raya, Sarvabhauma Bhattacharya, Vakreshvara

[p.312]
Pandit, Paramananda Puri, Shikhi Mahiti, Govinda, Shankara, and Gopinatha
Acharya as well as many others who were eternal associates of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. Seeing Shrinivasa, all these devotees were very happy. Seeing
Shrinivasa's unprecedented Gaura-prema, the devotees could understand that he
was Gaura-shakti, the energy of the Lord. They could understand that through him
the message of Shri Chaitanya and the various scriptures would be preached.
Knowing this, all the internal devotees of Shri Chaitanya gave various important
instructions to Shrinivasa. In a few days, having seen all the important holy places
of Shri Chaitanya's pastimes in Jagannatha Puri he bade farewell of the devotees
there in order to return to Bengal. All the devotees affectionately embraced
Shrinivasa before his departure. After bidding farewell to the devotees, Shrinivasa
started down the road to Bengal. When he had gone down the road for a while, he
heard that Shri Gadadhara Pandit had disappeared. Shrinivasa drowned in the
ocean of separation and began weeping and wailing piteously. That night in a
dream, Shri Gadadhara Pandit came to him in a dream and pacified him. After
this, Shrinivasas once again headed for Bengal. On the path he heard the news that
Shri Advaita Acharya and Shi Nityananda Prabhu had disappeared. Shinivasa
Acharya fell down on the road, stunned. There he spent the night wetting the earth
with his tears of sadness in separation. That night, out of their causeless mercy,
Shri Nityananda and Shri Advaita appeared to Shrinivasa in a dream and pacified
him. Gradually, Shrinvasa came to Bengal.
First he went to Shri Khanda, where he offered obeisances to the holy feet
of Shri Narahari Sarakara, Raghunandana Thakura and the other devotees. Having

[p.313]
taken their their blessings, he went on to Shri Mayapur in Navadwip. Seeing the
holy land of Shri Chaitanya's birth, Shrinivasa fell to the ground his voice choked
up in ecstasy. At the house of Shriman Mahaprabhu he found Vamshivadana
Thakura. Shrinivasa offered his obeisances to the lotus feet of Vamshivadana.
When he came to know who Vamshivadana Thakura was, he was very happy.
Shrinivasa loudly cried out the holy name of Shri Chaitanya. Shrinivasa prayed to
have darshan of the lotus feet of Shri Vishnupriya devi. At that time, Shri
Vishnupriya did not give him darshan. When Vamshivadana Thakura informed
Shri Vishnupriya of Shrinivasas intense desire to have her darshan, and requested
her again and again to meet with him, she gave her consent, and upon her order
Vamshivadana Thakura brought Shrinivasa to her.
Upon seeing her, Shrinivasa fell upon the earth with tears of prema,
offering prostrated obeisances. Shri Vishnupriya Thakurani gave her blessings to
Shrinivasa told him to remain and take prasada.
Out of separation from Shri Gauranga, Shri Vishnupriaya Thakurani had
grown thin as the waning moon of Krishna Caturdashi, when the slim lunar
crescent is barely perceptible just before the dark moon.

Her practice was

to set aside a grain of rice for every rosary of Hare Krishna mantras she would
chant. At the end of the day she would cook the rice she had set aside and offer it
to her deity of Mahaprabhu. Then she would accept just enough to keep her body
and soul together. In Nabadwip, Shrinivasa took darshan of many Vaishnavas
including Shri Murari gupta, Shrivasa Pandit, Damodara Pandit, Shri Sanjaya,
Shuklambara Brahmachari, and Gadadhara Das.

[p.314]
After staying for a few days in Nabadwip dham, he went to Shantipura to
the house of Shri Advaita Acharya and took darshan of the holy feet of Shri Sita
Thakurani, the eternal wife of Shri Advaita Acharya. Sita Thakurani, out of
separation from Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, was barely keeping her body and
soul together. She gave her blessings to Shrinivasa. Shrinivasa visited many other
devotees in Shantipura and offered them his respects and prayers. Gradually from
there he went to Khadadoha.
In Khadadoha, at the house of Shri Nityananda Prabhu, Shri Parameshvari
Thakura was staying. He brought Shrinivasa before Shri Vasudha and Shri
Jahnava, the wives of Nityananda, and Shri Birchandra, Nityananda's son.
Shrinivasa, with tears of prem in his eyes offered his dandavats before those great
souls, and, as he did so, Shri Jahnava placed her lotus feet upon his head and
blessed him with the dust of her lotus feet. Everyone was very affectionate
towards Shrinivasa. In this way he stayed for a few days in Khodadoha. Finally
Shri Jahnava Mata ordered him to go to Vrindavana Dham. Taking her order upon
his head he visited Khanakula, where he went to the house of Abhirama Gopala.
After he offered his respects to Abhiram Gopal Thakura, Abhiram Gopal gave
Shrinivasa three lashes with his whip called Jaya-mangal, or "Victory of
auspiciousness." His wife, Shri Malini Devi became outraged and forbade him to
continue, out of compassion for Shrinivas. She held her husband's hand and
forced him to stop whipping Shrinivas. Upon being lashed by the transcendental
whip of a pure devotee, Shrinivasa's body was overwhelmed with the ecstasy of
Krishna prema. Shrinivasa humbly offered his prayers to Abhiram Gopala and

[p.315]
begged his blessings to return to Shri Khanda.
In Shri Khanda, upon again seeing Narahari Sarakara Thakura and
Raghunandana Thakura, Shrinivasa was very happy. Finally he returned home to
Yajigrama and when he arrived at his own house again offered respects to his
mother's lotus feet. He then told her of the order he had received from Shri
Jahanava Devi to go to Vrindvana, and prayed for her blessings to go. His mother
gave her blessings with great pleasure. Shrinivasa soon left for Vrindavana. On the
way he stopped in Gaya and took darshan of the lotus feet of the Vishnu deity
there at the place where Mahaprabhu met Ishavara Puri and took initiation from
him.
After staying in Gaya for two or three days, he arrived in Kashi at the
house of Chandrashekhara. He also met with many other devotees there. Hearing
directly from Tapana Mishra and Chandrashekara about the different pastimes
Mahaprabhu had performed while in Kashi, Shrinivasa swam in the ocean of
nectar. After a few days he left Kashi.
Soon he arrived in Mathura. He took bath at Vishrama Ghat. It was at Vishrama
Ghata that Shri Krishna rested after slaing the demonic King Kamsa. And for that
reason it is known as Vishrama Ghata, or the "place of rest." Shrinivasa visited
Krishna's holy birthplace and took darshan of the Adikeshava Deity and then
turned towards Vrindavana. On the road to Vrindavana he met many brahmana
residents of Vrindavana who told him that Raghunatha Bhatta Goswami and other
great devotees had just passed away. Hearing this, he became very sorrowful. He
began to weep and fell to the ground in the agony of separation. The brahmanas

[p.316]
who were with him somehow helped him to the place where Shrila Jiva Goswami
was. Shri Jiva Goswami had heard of Shrinivasa. Shrinivasa offered his respects
to the lotus feet of Shri Jiva Goswami, who embraced him with great affection.
After this, they both had much to say to each other. Shrila Jiva Goswami who was
from Bengal wanted to hear news about the welfare of the different Gaudiya
Vaishnavas, and after they talked for some time, Jiva Goswami arranged for
prasada and a place to stay for Shrinivasa.
That day, Krishna Pandit, the servant of the Govinda Deity, brought prasada to
Shrinivasa. Shrinivasa took prasada with Jiva Goswami himself. It was in the
afternoon on the full moon day of the month of Vaishakha that Shrinivasa arrived
in Vrindavana at the place of Jiva Goswami. The next morning he went with Jiva
Goswami and took darshan of the Radha Raman Deities. They also saw Gopal
Bhatta Goswami. Gopal Bhatta Goswami was very happy to see Shrinivasa.
Shrinivasa offered his respects to the lotus feet of Gopal Bhatta Goswami with
great humility and begged him to initiate him in the divine mantra. Gopal Bhatta
Goswami with great happiness agreed to initiate him. The following day, at the
temple of Shri Radha-Raman, Shri Gopal Bhatta Goswami gave mantra diksha to
Shrinivasa. the day after he was initiated, Shrinivasawas sent to Raghunatha Das
Goswami. With great happiness, Shrinivasa went to the Radha-kunda where
Raghunatha Das Goswami used to stay. There he found Krishna das Kaviraj
Goswami, Raghava Pandit, and many other great devotees and offered his respects
to all of them. For three days he stayed at the Radha-kunda and received many
instructions about bhajan from those great souls. Having received the blessings of

[p.317]
all of the devotees there at Radha-kunda, Shrinivasa once again returned to
Vrindavan to the shelter of the lotus feet of Shri Jiva Goswami.
At length, Shri Jiva Goswami taught the Shrimad bhagavatam and the
scriptures of the Goswamis to Shrinivasa. In a short time Shrinivasa knew by heart
all the siddhantas of the Goswami's literature. Because of his expertise in
philosophy, Jiva Goswami gave him the title "Acharya." From that day on he
became famous among the Gaudiya Vaishnavas as Shrinivasa Acharya.
Shrinvasa Acharya had previously heard of Narottama Thakura, but at the
ashram of Jiva Goswami he met him in person. From the time of their first
meeting, Shrinivasa and Narottama became lifelong friends. Jiva Goswami
ordered the two of them to wander in the forest of Vrindavana with Raghava
Goswami. On the order of their guru they set about to journey through the
Vrindavan forests. Shri Raghava Pandit was a South Indian brahmana, and was
singlemindedly devoted to Shri Gaurasundara and was very dear to Him. Shrimad
Kavi Karnapura notes in his Gaura Ganodesha Dipika: "That person who was
once the dear gopi friend of Radharani and whose name was Champakalata later
appeared as Shri Raghava Goswami and lived at Govardhan where he worshiped a
deity of Giridhari in great ecstasy.
Shri Narahari Chakravarti dedicates five chapters of his Bhakti-ratnakara
to discussing in great detail how Shrinivasa and Narottama together with Raghava
Goswami wandered throughout the 64 kroshas of Mathura Mandala.
After wandering through the twelve forest of Vrindavan for some time,
they again returned to Jiva Goswami. At that time, Duhkhi Krishna Das,

[p.318]
(Shyamananda Prabhu) had just arrived from Gauda-desha. Shri Jiva Goswami
seeing him was greatly happy. Dukhi Krishnadas was the dear disciple of Shri
Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu. Shri Hriday Chaitanya Prabhu himself had sent Dukhi
Krishna Das to study at the school of Jiva Goswami. Jiva Goswami asked him for
news of the devotees in Bengal and in Utkala, inquiring about the welfare of each
and every one of them.
After this Dukhi Krishna Das was introduced to Shrinivasa and
Narottama. The three of them were ornamented with all good qualities and soon
began a friendship that was to last the rest of their lives. The three of them
cultured a deep understanding of the Goswami scriptures, studying them at the
lotus feet of Shrila Jiva Goswami. In this way they stayed with Rupa Goswami
who taught these faithful and dear disciples of his everything, until their
understanding was perfect.
At this time, it was decided by the Goswamis of Vrindavan to send
Narottama, Shrinivasa, and Shyamananda to Bengal to deliver the Goswami
scriptures and preach. The three of them were extremely renounced and highly
learned in the conclusions of the bhakti-rasa scriptures. After this, the three of
them were called before the Goswamis, who made clear their desires for preaching
the literatures. The three of them agreed with great enthusiasm to carry out the
task they had been ordered to do. It was settled that the three of them would leave
on an auspicious day. The Shukla-paksha day of the month of Agrahayana was
chosen.

Thereafter, having first offered their respectful obeisances unto the

three principle deities of Vrindavan, Shri Govinda, Gopinatha, and Madana

[p.319]
Mohan, those three great souls, Shyamananda Prabhu, Narottama Thakura, and
Shrinivasa Acharya were sent by Jiva Goswami with the Goswami sciptures to
Bengal. The books were carefully packed in a trunk and loaded onto an oxcart for
safekeeping. In this way they set out with the oxcart on the road to Mathura on
their way to Bengal. It was a long way, and they would slowly move from one
village to the next, stopping at night in a village where they would perform
sankirtan, preach, take prasada and rest. Gradually the bullock cart arrived in
Vanavishnupura.
Vanavishnupura was the headquarters of King Birhambir, a leader of
dacoits. He heard from one of his thieves that many people were moving along the
road with a chest full of jewels loaded onto a bullock cart heading towards
Bengal. He reported that they had just entered Vanavishnupura. The king
instructed his men to steal the chest of jewels from the bullock cart. The devotees
finally arrived in Vanavishnupura just as the sun was going down. After confering
with one another, they decided to settle down for the night and rest on the banks of
a sarovara in the village. Since many people lived nearby there, they could have
some of them watch the bullock cart and make sure that nothing was stolen.
Indeed, upon seeing the effulgence of these Vaishnavas, and after listening to their
bhajan and kirtan, all the people of that village were astonished.
King Birhambir again and again sent different thieves to get news of their
movements. And it came to pass by the will of providence that after many days
his mind's goal was achieved. One especially dark night the devotees were
sleeping peacefully by the side of a river after taking prasada, having left all the

[p.320]
Goswami scriptures in the chest on the bullock cart. They were deep asleept. At
that time, the thieves came and carefully stole away with the chest of books and
hurried away. They brought the chest to King Birhambir, as he had ordered them
to do. When the king saw the chest, he thought "Jewels! Treasure!" His mind was
carried away by happiness. Calling the thieves before him, he rewarded them with
new clothes and ornaments and commended them on their good work.
The king considered, "This chest has certainly come from the west. After
many days, I have finally obtained great wealth. In this way, his joy was
boundless." He had been told that some valuable jewels were inside the chest, and
so he wanted that chest. King Birhambir had an astrologer in his court who had
told him that what was in the chest was priceless.
In this way, when the devotees arose the following morning, they saw that
the chest containing the Goswami's scriptures was no longer on the bullock cart.
They felt as if their heads had been struck by a thunderbolt. They began searching
about and inquiring from everyone around. But no one knew anything. They
could find nothing. The three of them were close to death with depression. Some
time later, when they were more calm, they said, "Who can understand the will of
Govindadev? When we left on this journey we had His blessings. It was by his
will that all the Goswami scriptures were put into that one chest. " In this way the
devotees spoke contemplatively about the meaning of the tragedy that had befallen
them. They remembered once hearing from the Goswamis that Vanavishnupura
had a king who was the leader of a gang of dacoits. That king was famous for
stealing all sorts of valuables from pilgrims passing on the road.

[p.321]
That night, the king opened the chest containing the Goswami's scriptures.
After opening the box, he removed the cloth that covered what was beneath.
There he saw the treasured books of the Goswamis. He opened one of the books
and saw the name "Shri Rupa Goswami" written on the palm leaf. When he saw
the infallibly beautiful handwriting of Shri Rupa Goswami all the sins that he had
amassed throughout his long life of crime immediately flew away from him. His
heart was purified. From his pure heart arose the divine rapture of Krishna prema.
Again placing the Goswami scriptures carefully within the chest, the King retired
for the evening. As he was resting, he had an unusual dream. In his dream he saw
a beautiful person, whose body glowed with an unprecedented effulgent as
brilliant as a golden mountain. His smile was like the moon. Then that person
spoke, saying, "Do not worry. Soon I shall come and we shall meet. At that time
your joy shall be unceasing. Life after life you are to be my eternal servant."
When the king had seen the scriptures in the chest, he immediately began
to worry, thinking to himself, "The loss of these holy scriptures is certainly
causing great trouble to someone, somewhere. This will be a cause of great
anxiety for me." In his dream some divine person said, "O King. Do not worry.
In order to retrieve these treasured scriptures I shall soon come to meet with you.
Life after life you shall be my eternal servant."
The three devotees decided that Shri Narottama Thakura should go to
Kheturi Gram, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu would go to Ambika Kalna, and
Shrinivasa Acharya himself would stay behind in Vishnupura, where he would go
to the king's palace and retrieve the Goswami scriptures. A brahmana resident of

[p.322]
Vishnupura named Shri Krishna Vallabha was fascinated upon seeing Shrinivasa
Acharya and brought Shrinivasa Acharya to his own home where he duly
worshiped with Acharya with the proper respect. At length, the Acharya initiated
him into the divine mantra. There were others also who were present there who
recognized Shrinivasa Acharya as their guru and accepted initiation from him.
King Birhambir always used to listen to the Bhagavatam. Hearing this,
Shrinivasa Acharya wanted to go to the king's palace and give the Bhagavatam
lecture. He suggested this proposal to Shri Krishna Vallabha. Shri Krishna
Vallabha told him that the king had great faith in the Bhagavata and in sadhus. He
said, "Let us go to the king's palace today." Hearing this, Shrinivasa Acharaya
quickly went with Krishna Vallabha to the king's palace. When Raja Birhambir
saw the brilliant effulgence of Shrinivasa Acharya, he fell to the ground offering
his prostrated obeisances. At that time he offered Shrinivasa an elevated seat, and
gragrant flower garlands. After this, Shrinivasa Acharya intoned the guru-vandana
prayers to his spiritual master in a sweet voice, and began his explanation of
Shrimad Bhagavatam. His recitation of the verses was wonderful, and his
explanations were even more wonderful. After hearing his explanation, the whole
assembly, including the king, were melted by Krishna Prema.
It is said that "Just by seeing a great Vaishnava one is purified." The great
dacoit leader was purified simply upon seeing Shrinivasa Acharya. After
Shrinviasa Acharya had finished his explanations of Shrimad Bhagavatam, he
began the Sankirtan of the holy name and, after some time, began dancing in the
kirtan. After some time, Raja Birhambir, clutching a straw between his teeth, fell

[p.323]
before the lotus feet of Shrinivasa Acharya and offered his prostrated obeisances
in a mood of great humility and begged him for his mercy again and again.
Shrinivasa Acharya took hold of him and embraced him heartily. He told him that
very soon, Shri Gauranga Himself would bestow mercy upon Raja Birhambir.
After this the king brought out the chest with the scriptures of the Goswamis and
offered them to Shrinivasa Acharya.
Shrinivasa Acharaya could understand the meaning of Shri Gaurasundara's
"boundless sweet mercy." One can see his will manifest in everything that
happens. Shrinivasa Acharya gave his blessings to the king. News of all this
quickly reached Shri Jiva Goswami in Vrindavana. Hearing news of all that had
transpired, Jiva Gowamis and the other Goswamis were very happy and found the
activities of Shrinivasa Acharya to be wonderful.
Bidding his leave of the king, Shrinivasa Acharya took the chest of books
to Yajigram and told all the devotees there of what had happened. Hearing
everything from Shrinivasa, the devotees were very happy. At that time he heard
of the passing of Shri Vishnupriya Thakurani in Nabadwipa. In great unhappiness
and distress, Shrinivasa Acharya fainted. The devotees all did their best to revive
and console Shrinivasa, and after some time he came to his senses. At that time a
message came from Shri Raghunandana in Shri Khanda, inviting Shrinivasa
Acharya to come there. Without any delay, Shrinivasa set out for Shri Khanda.
When Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura, Raghunandan Thakura and all the other
eternal associates of Shri Chaitanya in Shri Khanda saw Shrinivasa Acharya they
were very happy. Shrinivasa offered his respects to all of them and gave them

[p.324]
news of the Goswamis in Vrindavana.
At this time, Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura told Shrinivasa Acharya that
it was his mother's wish that Shrinivasa marry. He said, "Your mother is a great
devotee. For a long time she has rendered service in Yajigrama. Whatever she
orders you to do you must do. It is her wish, as it was your father's, that you must
marry. Without having to hear his mother's order a second time, Shrinivasa took it
upon his head. After staying for a few more days in Shri Khanda, he went to
Kanthak Nagara to visit the house of Gadadhara Dasa Thakura and take darshan of
him.
After he Offered his respects to Gadadhara Das Thakura, Gadadhara Das
embraced him affectionately. Gadadhara Dasa wanted to hear from Shrinivasa
about all the devotees in Vrindavana, especially the Goswamis. He was curious to
know from him all about the welfare of those devotees. that Shrinivasa had seen
on his long journeys. After hearing everything from him Gadadhara das became
very happy. The Acharaya spent a few more days with Gadadhara Das and then
bade farewell to him. At the time of Shrinivasa's departure, Gadadhara Dasa
blessed him, saying: "One day you will certainly taste the nectar of the Lord's own
Sankirtan, surrounded by his personal associates. You have my blessings to go
and marry. May it bring you auspiciousness."
Accepting the blessings and instructions of Shri Gadadhara Das, Shrinvasa
Acharya returned to Yajigrama. At that time in Yajigrama Raghunandan Thakura
had just arrived, to the great satisfaction of everyone. In Yajigrama lived a devoteebrahmana named Gopal Chakravarti. He had a beautiful and devoted daughter

[p.325]
named Draupadi. Shri Raghunandana Thakura arranged she they would be joined
in holy matrimony to Shrinivasa Acharya. On the day known as akshaya triti in the
month of Vaishakha, the wedding was performed. The Acharya's wife's previous
name was Draupadi, but after the marriage, her name became Ishvari. Previously
Shri Gopal Chakravarti had taken mantra initiation from Shrinivasa Acharya.
Gopal Chakravarti had two sons named Shyama Dasa and Ramachandra. They
took initiation from Shrinivasa Acharya as well. Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura,
hearing the news of Shrinivas Acharya's wedding was very happy.
At length, Shrinivasa Acharya began instructing his disciples in the
Goswami scriptures. Dvija Haridas's sons Shridas and Shri Gokulananda also
took initiation from Shrinivasa Acharya and began studying the Goswami
scriptures under his guidance. Gradually Shrinivasa Acharya's influence began to
spread. In a short time, many sincere and faithful souls came to him to take shelter
at his lotus feet.
Shrinivasa Acharya meets Ramachandra Kaviraja
One day Shrinivasa Acharaya was in Yajigrama at his own house, where
many devotees had gathered to hear him lecture on Shrimad-Bhagavatam. At that
time, passing by the house of Shrinivasa Acharya was Ramachandra Kaviraja the
son of Chiranjiva Sen (one of Mahaprabhu's eternal associates). He had just been
married, and he and his new bride were on their way back from the wedding.
From a long way off, Shrinivasa Acharya saw Ramachandra Kaviraja, and
Ramachandra Kaviraja also saw Shrinvasa Acharya from a distance. Upon seeing
each other from a distance a deep mood of friendship arose within the hearts of

[p.326]
those two eternally perfect devotees of Shri Gauranga. After seeing each other
they were eager to meet one another. Shrinivasa Acharya had heard about
Ramachandra Kaviraja from the local people. And Ramachandra Kaviraja had
heard about Shrinivasa Acharya. In this way they met and were introduced by
some of the local people.
Shri Ramachandra along with his new bride came to the house of
Shrinivasa Acharya. How quickly the day passed. They spent the night where they
had been staying since coming to Yajigrama, at a brahmana's house near the home
of Shrinvasa Acharaya, and the following morning went to Shrinivasa Acharya
and fell before his feet offering prostrated obeisances. The Acharya bade
Ramachandra Kaviraja to get up from the ground, and heartily embraced him
saying, "Life after life you have been my friend. Providence has brought us
together again today by arranging our meeting." Both of them felt great happiness
as a result of their having met. Seeing that Ramchandra had an acute and deeply
learned transcendental intelligence, Shrinivasa was very happy. He began to make
him hear the Goswami scriptures. After a few days the Acharya initiated him in
the divine Radha-Krishna mantra.
After some time, Shrinivasa Acharya again started out for Vrindavana.
Along with him were many other devotees who also wanted to go to Vrindavana.
They followed the path the Acharya had previously taken, and after some time
walking and walking, they finally arrived in Gaya Dham, where they took darshan
of the lotus feet of the Vishnu deity. After this they went to Kashi. There
Shrinivasa had darshan of Shri Chandrashekara and the other devotees of Kashi,

[p.327]
all of whom were very happy to see Shrinivasa and embraced him with great
affection.
Shrinviasa stayed in Kashi for two or three days and then left for Mathura.
Upon entering Mathura, he bathed once again at Vishrama Ghata. After this, he
went to the holy place of Krishna's advent within this world and saw the Adi
Keshava Deity there. After this, he left Mathura for Vrindavana. Soon he arrived
in Vrindavan. There, Shri Jiva Goswami was expecting him. Shrinvasa went to
Shri Jiva Goswami and offered him his respectful obeisances, and Shri Jiva
Goswami made him get up and then embraced him heartily. He asked for news of
the Gaudiya Vaishnavas in Bengal, whom he had not seen in such a long time. Just
at this time, from Puri, Shyamananda Prabhu also arrived in Vrindavan. He
offered his respects to Shri Jiva who embraced him and asked for news of the
devotees in Puri. After this, Shrinivasa and Shymananda were reunited. They
offered obeisances and embraced and were very happy to see each other. Then, the
news came that Dvija Haridasa had just passed away and they were very unhappy.
They stayed in Vrindavan with Jiva Goswami, who taught them various
siddhantas, devotional conclusions, from a book that he had just completed, the
Sat Sandarbha: Six Treatises. At this time Jiva Goswami had also begun work on
a book called Gopal Champu. He read the invocation or mangalacaranam of that
book to Shrinivasa and Shyamananda.
Shrinivasa Acharya stayed in Vrindavan with Shri Jiva Goswami
associating with the other Goswamis there for a few months in great happiness.
After some time, he sent to Gauda Desh for Ramchandra Kaviraja, requesting him

[p.328]
to come to Vrindavana. Some Bengali devotees who were in Vrindavan took the
message to Ramchandra. When Ramchandra Kaviraja arrived, he introduced him
to Shri Jiva Goswami. Ramchandra offered his full obeisances to Shri Jiva, who
made him stand and embraced him. Jiva Goswami ordered him to visit the
important deities in Vrindavan, beginning with Radharamana, Govinda, and
Gopinatha and to take darshan of the lotus feet of the Goswamis. Together with
Shyamananda and Shrinivasa, Ramchandra did as he was ordered, and the three of
them took darshan of the deities and saints of Vrindavan. Seeing the extreme
devotional humility and other good qualities of Ramchandra Kaviraja, the
Vrindavan Goswamis were most pleased.
Shrimad Jiva Goswami then ordered Ramchandra to take darshan of the
different forests of Vrindvana. After he had seen everything, he went to Radhakunda and took darshan of the lotus feet of Raghunath Das Goswami and Krishna
Das Kaviraja Goswami. After this, upon the order of Shri Jiva Goswami,
Shrinivasa Acharya and Shyamananda Prabhu set out for Gaudadesh.
Gradually they came to Vanavishnupura. When they arrived there, King
Birhambir was so happy to see Shrinivasa Acharya that he began to dance. After
this the king carefully worshiped Shrinivasa Acharya according to the rules of
worship for the guru, then he offered him nice foodstuffs, and after this arranged
for a big festival in the royal palace. Seeing the bhakti of the king, Shyamananda
was amazed. At this time, Shrinivasa Acharya initiated the king in the RadhaKrishna mantra. The king's name became Shri Chaitanya Dasa The king's son,
Darhihambir, also took initiation, and his name became Shri Gopal Dasa. By the

[p.329]
grace of Shrinivasa Acharya, the king arranged for the installation of a deity, Shri
Kalachand. Shrinivasa Acharya, with his own hand, installed the deities by
performing an abhishek ceremony and puja as well as all the other appropriate
rituals. After staying there for some time, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu set out for
Puri. Shrinivasa Acharya left for Yajigrama.
At that time, the king of Shikhareshvara, Shri Harinarayana Dev invited
Shrinivasa Acharya to his own house. The eternal associates of Shrinivasa
Acharya arranged for a triumphal reception for Shrinivasa Acharya there. The
Acharya stayed there for a few days and spoke Bhagavat-katha that flowed as
sweetly as the current of the Ganges. Many people there attained the mercy of
Shrinivasa Acharya.
After staying a few days in the land of Shikheshvara, he arrived in Shri
Khanda, and there he heard that on the Krishna Ekadashi day in the month of
Agrahayana, Shri Narahari Sarakara Thakura entered into the Lord's unmanifest
pastimes, passing away from this temporary world. Upon heraing this he fell upon
the ground, unconscious. In great lamentation, he cried a river of tears. In the pain
of separation he could not contain himself. Shri Raghunandana Thakura was lost
in sorrow. Upon seeing Shrinivasa, he was somewhat pacified. For some days
Shrinivasa stayed in Shri Khanda, before going on to Kanthak Nagara. Arriving
there he heard that in the month of Kartika Gadadhara Das had passed away.
Pierced by the agony of separation, Shrinivasa felt that his life had gone. In great
sorrow, he somehow composed himself and returned to Yajigrama. There, when
he returned to his own home he invited all the devotees to a big festival.

[p.330]
Some time later, on the Krishna Ekadashi in the month of Magh they had
a festival honoring the disappearance of Dvija Haridasa in Kanchangari Nagara.
To attend the festival Shrinivasa went to Kanchangari Nagara. At that festival
there was a great crowd. It was on the day of the festival, that Dvija Haridas's
sons Shri Dasa and Shri Gokulananda took initiation from Shrinivasa Acharya.
After staying there for some days, Shrinivasa left and started on his way to Kheturi
Gram. There, on the Phalguna Purnima day, the day of Mahaprabhu's advent, a
great festival was to be held. The festival had been arranged by King Santosh
Dutta. He was the son of Narottam's brother as well as Narottam's disciple. For
this festival, Jahanava Devi herself, the wife of Lord Nityananda, had come. Along
with her came Shri Nidhi Shri Pati Shri Krishna Mishra, Shri Gokula, Shri
Raghunandana, and many other eternal associates of Mahaprabhu.
Shrinivasa Acharya did the abhisheka ceremony and the puja for the deitiy
installation. When the day of the full moon in the month of Phalguna came they
began they began the great festival of Hari Kirtana by chanting the holy name all
day long. They chanted day and night, and in the midst of that great kirtan
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu along with his eternal associates appeared before the
devotees and revealed themselves to the sight of everyone. The next day of the
festival, a great feast was held.
The names of the deities were Shri Gauranga, Shri Vallabhikanta, Shri
Vrajamohana, Shri Krishna, Shri Radha Kanta, Shri Radharaman. The installation
of these six deities was a great festival. The world had never seen such a great
Vaishnava festival. At the conclusion of the festival, Raja Santosh Datta

[p.331]
distributed beautiful cloth and ornaments to all the devotees. The devotees in their
turn showered the king with many auspicious blessings.
After the festival, Shrinivasa Acharya and Shyamananda Prabhu went back
to Yajigrama. Many Vaishanvas went with them, and when they arrived at the
house of Shrinivasa they began a festival there. After some days, Narottama
Thakura arrived there. After the three of them spent some time together in
Yajigrama exchanging their realizations, Shyamananda Prabhu headed for
Utkaladesh. Shrinivasa, Narottama, and Ramchandra Kaviraja left for
Nabvadwipa. When they arrived in Mayapura, Navadwipa at the house of Shri
Gauranga, they found the Lord's ancient servant Ishan Thakura, and offered their
respects to his lotus feet by falling down like rods. They all introduced
themselves to Ishan and when he found out who they were he embraced all of
them in the ecstasy of prema.
At this time Ishan Thakura was the only one staying in the house of
Shriman Mahaprabhu. The following day, Ishan took them on parikrama, and
together the three of them saw all the holy places in Nabadwipa. As he took themn
from one place to the next, they were very happy to hear from Ishan of all the
different pastimes the Lord performed in Nabadwipa. After he had shown them the
holy places, they again offered their respects and, begging his leave, set out for
Shri Khanda. Soon after this, Shri Ishan Thakura passed away from this world
and entered the unmanifest pastimes of the Lord. In this way, all the eternal
associates of the Lord in Nabadwipa and Mayapura gradually disappeared from
the earth and entered into the Lord's unmanifest lila.

[p.332]
One day, Raghunandana Thakura wanted Shrinivasa to come for a visit, so
he sent a devotee to carry this message to Yajigrama. Shrinivasa Acharya quickly
came to Shri Khanda and offered his respects to Raghunandana. After giving his
blessings to Shrinivasa, Raghunandana said, "May you live long. Preach the
mesage of Shri Gauranga far and wide." After saying this, Shri Raghunandana
Thakura went before the deity and, calling his son Kanai, offered himself to the
lotus feet of his Gopal-Gauranga deities. After this, the devotees lost themselves in
Sankirtan for three days. At that time Raghunandana Thakura again offered
himself to the deities of Narahari Sarakara Thakura, Shri Gauranga and Shri
Madana Gopala, and before their merciful glance disappeared from this world.
Upon seeing the disappearance of Shri Raghunandan Thakura, his son
Kanai Thakura, Shrinvasa Acharya, and the other devotees were lost in sorrow,
drowning in the tears that poured from their lotus eyes in separation from that
great saint. After this, Kanai Thakura arranged for a big festival. All the devotees
of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu were invited from everywhere. On the day of the
festival a great number of Vaishnavas arrived there and assembled together. In a
big courtyard they began their complete absorption in chanting the holy name. and
dancing. In that divine kirtan, Shri Raghunandana Thakura himself appeared
before them, dancing. Shri Raghunandana Thakura's disappearance day is on the
14th day of the white moon in the month of Shravana. Anyone who saw or heard
of this festival attained their life's success.
At the end of the festival, Shrinivasa bid goodbye and went to
Vanavishnupura where he was given a royal reception at the palace of the king.

[p.333]
The Acharya began giving class and performing kirtan at the king's house. From
the four directions came many Vaishnavas, who all assembled there. The king
with great affection performed all kinds of service to the devotees. In Utkala,
Vanavishnupura turns into Vishnupura. Many devotees and faithful and pious
people came from there to take shelter of the lotus feet of Shrinivasa Acharya.
In Radhadesh, in Gopalpur Gram lived a great devotee-brahmana named
Shri Raghava Cakravarti. He had a daughter named Shri Gauranga Priya. Not
having arranged for the wedding of his daughter, he was in great anxiety, and
constantly worried about this. He went before the deity of Mahaprabhu and told
the Lord everything, making different offerings, and falling before the lotus feet of
the deity. That night that brahmana and his wife had a dream in which his
daughter was given to Shrinivasa Acharya. After this wonderful dream both of
them became very happy. Then again they began to worry that such a thing was
impossible. After thinking this over for some time, Raghava Chakravarti went
quickly to Shrinivasa Acharya. After offering his respects to the Acharya,
Raghava Chakravarti with folded hands stood before him. Understanding his
desire, Shrinivasa Acharya smiled slightly. He offered Raghava Chakravarti a seat
and inquired about the reason for his visit. After remaining silent for some time,
the brahmana finally spoke, saying, "I have come to submit a suggestion at your
lotus feet, but I cannot find the audacity to express it, out of awe for Your
Reverence. If you can reassure me that I have nothing to fear in speaking I shall
tell you why I have come." The Acharya said, "You have nothing to fear. Please
speak your mind." At that time the brahmana offered Shrinivasa Acharya his

[p.334]
daughter's hand in marriage. When he heard this, the Acharya smiled slightly.
Upon hearing of all this, the devotees present there became very happy. At last
Shrinivasa Acharya agreed to wed the daughter of Raghava Chakravarti.
With great pomp, Maharaja Birhambir made arrangements for the wedding
of Shrinivasa Acharya. When the stars were auspicious, Shri Raghava
Chakravarti, having endowed his daughter with beautiful garments and ornaments
came to Shrinivasa Acharya and offered her hand to him. After marrying Shrimati
Gauranga Priya, Shrinivasa Acharya returned with his new bride to Yajigrama.
Exactly at that time the divine energy of Nityananda—Shri Jahnava Devi had just
arrived at the house of Shrinivasa Acharya, having returned from a pilgrimage to
Vrindavana. Seeing her, the Acharya's happiness knew no limits. With great
respect he took the dust from her lotus feet, offered her the seat of honor and, after
worshiping her, after which he bade his new bride, Gauranga Priya, offer her
respects and prayers to the lotus feet of Jahnava Mata.
When Shri Jahnava Mata, who is known as Bhakta-Svarupini—the
personification of Bhakti— saw the good character and beauty of the young bride
She embraced her with great affection. With much happiness, She remained in the
house of Shrinivasa Acharya for some days, after which she again returned to her
village, Khorodoha Gram. In Yajigram Shrinivasa Acharya accepted many
disciples. He would often discuss the shastras and perform Sankirtan until his
voice was hoarse and he could no longer speak. In Yajigrama, Shrinivasa Acharya
experienced great ecstasy in discussing the Goswami scriptures, in studying them
and in teaching them to others. In this way he would pass his days in great

[p.335]
happiness. Seeing the Acharya's devotional opulence and expansive capacity for
preaching, everyone was amazed. By his influence many important atheists cmae
and surrendered at his lotus feet.
Shrinivasa Acharya, Shri Narottama and Shri Ramchandra Kaviraj were of
one heart and mind. Shrila Narottama Thakura has written doya kore shri acharya,
prabhu shrinivasa—ramachandra mage narottamo das: "O Master Shrinivasa, be
merciful to me! Narottama prays for the association of Ramchandra Kaviraja."
Shrinivasa Acharya had three sons and three daughters. The names of his
daughters were Krishna Priya, Hemalata, and Phulapi Thakurani. His sons names
were Vrindavan Vallabha, Radha Krishna, and Shri Gita Govinda. Shri Gita
Govinda son was Krishna Prasada. His son was Jagadananda. Jagadananda
Thakura had two wives. His first wife's son was Yadavendra and his second
wive's sons were Radha Mohana, Bhuvana Mohana, Gaur Mohan, Shyam Mohan
and Madan Mohan. The descendant's of Bhuvan Mohan at present live in
Murshidabad in Manikyahar Gram.

Shyamanda Prabhu

"Simply by accepting that the associates of Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu are
eternally perfect one may attain the service of Krishna in Vrindavana."—Narottam
Das Thakura.
Shri Shyamananda, Shrinvasa and Shri Narottama Dasa Thakura are all

[p.336]
eternal associates of Shri Gaurasundara. For the purpose of preaching the holy
message of Sri Caitanya all over the earth they appeared within this world.
Shri Shyamananda Prabhu was born in Utkala, in a place called Dharenda
Bhadura Pura. His father's name was Shri Krishna Mandal. His mother's name
was Shri Durika. Shri Krishna Mandal, who was in the dynasty of the Six Gopas,
had sired many sons and daughters who had passed away before this son took his
birth. Because of the great misfortune which had befallen his family, Shri Krishna
Mandal named the boy Dukhi. Everyone said that the boy would become a great
person, a Mahapurush. On an auspicious moment on the full moon day of the
month of Caitra, he appeared within this world by the mercy of Lord Jagannatha.
Because he had come to preach the glories of Jagannatha, the Lord Himself
protected him as he grew up. The boy was so beautiful he was like cupd himself;
all eyes were fixed upon him.
Gradually it was time for the child's "grain-eating ceremony" (that time at
which a child is first offered solid food.), and soon after that he began going to
school. Seeing the amazing brain this child had, the scholars were astonished. In
a short time, the boy learned Sanskrit grammar, poetry, and rhetoric. And soon
after this he began seriously studying the scriptures. Upon hearing the glories of
Sri Caitanya and Nityananda from the mouths of the local devotees, the boy
developed a powerful desire to take shelter at his lotus feet. His father, Shri
Krishna Mandala, was a great devotee of Krishna. Seeing his son always
engrossed in thoughts of Gaura-Nityananda, he told him to take mantra initiation.
The boy said, "Hriday Caitanya Prabhu is my guru, he lives in Ambika

[p.337]
Kalna. His guru is Gauridas Pandit. Those two great brothers, Shri Gaura and
Nityananda always reside in his home. If you give the order, I will go to him and
become his disciples.
Shri Krishna Mandal said, "My boy! That is a long way away! How will
you get there?"
Dukhi said, "Father, many people from here will soon go to Gauda-desh to
bathe in the Ganges. When they go, I will go with them."
For a long time, his father thought this over, and finally gave his
permission. After receiving the blessings of his father and mother he began his
journey to Gaudadesh. Gradually he came to Nabadwip and Shantipur, and finally
arrived in Ambika Kalna. Upon reaching Ambika Kalna, he began inquring from
the local people where the house of Gauridas Pandit was. He paying his
obeisances outside the temple of Sriman Mahaprabhu at the house of Gauridas
Pandit. There he found Hridaya Caitanya Prabhu. Hridaya Caitanya, upon seeing
the boy, said, "Who are you?"
Dukhi said, "I want to render service at your holy feet. I have come a long
way—from Dharenda Vahadur Pura. I was born in the dynasty of the Six Gopas.
My father's name is Krishna Mandal. My name is Dukhi."
Hridaya Caitanya was pleased with the sweet words of this young boy.
He said, "From now on your name is Krishna Das."
From that day on, Shri Krishna Das assiduously served his guru. Shri
Hridaya Chaitanya waited for an auspicious day and soon initiated him in the
mantram. Krishna das soon became fixed in his service. Seeing Krishna das's

[p.338]
determined service, his bhakti, and his deep intelligence and understanding,
Hridaya Caitanya ordered him to go to Vrindavan to seek out Jiva Goswami. He
ordered him to to study the scriptures of the Goswamis and their associates under
the guidance of Jiva Goswami.
Shri Krishnadasa bowed his head and accepted his guru's order to leave for
Vrindavan, and on an auspicious day, he began his journey. At that time, Shri
Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu gave many messages to Krishna dasa to carry to the
residents of Vrindavana. He requested him to communicate his dandavats and
respects to the lotus feet of the six Goswamis. Dukhi Krishna das first went to
Nabadwip Dhama. There he asked the local people where he could find the old
house of Jagannatha Mishra, and if he might be allowed to enter that house.
Arriving at the house of Sri Gauranga, he found Ishan Thakura and offered full
obeisances and respectful prayers to him. Ishan was very old. He asked
Krishnadas, "Who are you?" Krishnadas explained who he was. Hearing his
story, Ishan bestowed his blessings upon Krishnadas. After spending a few days
in Nabadwip, Krishnadas turned his sweet face towards Vrindavan and continued
on his journey.
On his way he came to Gayadham to take darshan of the lotus feet of the
Vishnu deity there, where Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu had taken initiation from
Ishvara Puri. Remembering how Ishvara Puri had given the mantra to the Lord, he
became overwhelmed by ecstasy. After this, he went to Benares, Kashidhama.
There he took darshan of the holy feet of Tapana Mishra, Chandrashekcara, and
many other devotees, offering prayers and obeisances to all of them. They all

[p.339]
bestowed innumerable blessings upon Krishnadasa, and he continued on his way
to Mathura. After a long time, he finally entered Mathura. There he bathed in
Vishrama-ghata, took darshan of the Adikeshava deity, and, upon visiting the
place where Shri Krishna appeared within this world became choked up with
prema. Thereafter he headed in the direction of Vrindavana.
After finding out the exact location of Shri Jiva Goswami's bhajan-kutir
from the local people, he sought out Jiva Goswami. Arriving at his bhajan-kutir,
he offered his dandavats and respects to Jiva Goswami. Jiva Goswami asked who
he was, and Krishnadas told him everything. He explained how he was a disciple
of Hridaya Caitanya, and how Hridaya-Caitanya had sent him to Jiva Goswami for
instruction in the scriptures. Jiva Goswami had previously been told by Hridaya
Caitanya, "I have a disciple named Dukhi Krishna Dasa. I am offering him to
you. Teach him well in Krishna consciousness. When his mind is fixed in
Krishna consciousness, after he has studied the scriptures carefully under guidance
for some time, you may send him back to me."
Upon knowing that Dukhi Krishnadasa had been sent by Hridaya Caitanya
to work under his direction, Shri Jiva Goswami was very happy. Krishnadasa was
under his protection. Shri Krishna dasa carefully served Jiva Goswami and
studied the scriptures of the Goswamis very seriously. At that time Shrinivas
Acharya and Narottama das Thakura also came to study the Goswami scriptures
under the authority of Jiva Goswami. Krishnadas would meet with them and study
the scriptures together with Srinivasa Acharya and Narottama das Thakura.
Krishnadasa prayed for service that would bring him closer to Jiva

[p.340]
Goswami. When Jiva Goswami saw this, he said with joy, "Every day you must
draw some water from the Kanana-Kunja." From that day on, Dukhi Krishna das
with great affection and eagerness would go to that Kunja to fill Jiva Goswami's
waterpot. The opportunity to serve Jiva Goswami in this way gave Krishnadas's
life new meaning. By drawing water for Jiva Goswami every day Krishnadas felt a
transformation within himself. He would became joyful, and his eyes would fill
with tears of ecstasy. Whenever he would hear the name of Radha and Govinda
loudly chanted in kirtan and whenever he would remember their divine pastimes,
he would become dumbstruck with wonder. From time to time he would notice a
girl who seemed to be a beautiful princess drawing water from the same Kunja and
carrying it on her head. Brahma and Siva would be enchanted by her beauty. In
this way, Dukhi Krishnadas continued his service of visiting the Kunja and
drawing water for Jiva Goswami. His service certainly pleased the prince and
princess of Vraja, Sri Sri Radha and Krishna, so much so that they wanted to
reveal themselves to Krishnadas. One day Krishnadasa was performing his
regular duty of filling the waterpot from the Kunja. He was fully absorbed in the
samadhi of Krishna prema. At that time he saw in the water beneath his pot a
wonderfully shining bangle, an anklet. Upon seeing it he was astonished by its
beauty and overwhelmed by transcendental ecstasy. He reached his hand within
the waters of the Kunja and pulled out this unusual bangle. Touching it to his
head, he felt a wave of transcendental ecstasy. Then, finding a piece of cloth that
appeared to be the border of a woman's scarf attached to the bangle, he thought to
seek out the owner of the bangle in order to return it.

[p.341]
In that place, that very morning, seeing that the bangle from the left foot of Shri
Radha Thakurani was missing, her gopi friends were dumbstruck. Shri Radha
Thakurani said, "Last night while I was dancing with Krishna by the side of the
Kunja, the bangle must have fallen in the Kunja; go there, and after finding it
bring it to me. Vishakha devi went to the banks of the Kunja and began searching
and searching for the bangle. As she was searching, she came upon Dukhi
Krishna das, who at that time was filling his water pot at the Kunja.
Vishakha devi asked him, "Have you found a bangle near here?" Dukhi
Krishnadasa seeing this beautiful girl who appeared to be a goddess from heaven
was dazzled by her brilliance. Hearing the ambrosial words from this immortal
goddess, he was struck dumb with the ecstasy of love of Godhead.

Vishakha

devi again asked him, "Have you found a bangle near here?" Dukhi Krishna das
humbly offered his respectful obeisances, and meekly said, "Yes, I have it. Please
tell me, who are you? " Vishakha said, "I am the daughter of a gopa."
"Where do you live?"
"I live in this village."
"Is the bangle yours?"
"No, it's not mine. At my house there is a newly maried girl...."
"How was it lost here?"
"...Yesterday when she was picking flowers here at the Kunja, it somehow slipped
off her foot and she lost her bangle in the water. I have come here to find her
bangle. Wait here, and I will bring her to you."
A little while later, Shri Radha Thakurani came with Vishakhadevi and hid behind

[p.342]
a tree. Vishakha devi said, "O devotee! She has come for her bangle." From a
distance Dukhi Krishnadas could see the brilliant effulgence of the daughter of
King Vrishabhanu, and felt as if his soul had been stolen from his body. In great
transcendental bliss he gave the bangle to Vishakhadevi. At that time he had some
intuition that a great mystery was being revealed to him. With his eyes fille dwith
the tears of krishna prema, he fell to the ground and offered his prostrated
obeisances in full submission. His voice was choked up in ecstasy. At that time
Vishkaha devi said, "O best of the devotees, my girlfriend would very much like
to show her gratitude by granting you a benediction. You may ask for whatever
you want."
Dukhi Krishnadas replied, "There is nothing that I want; I only pray to take the
dust of her lotus feet."
Vishakha devi replied, "Take bath in this Kunda." Dukhi Krishnadasa went to
bathe in the Kunda, he offered his obeisances, and then, when he immersed
himself in the water he assumed the form of a beautiful girl. Returning to
Vishakhadevi, Dukhi Krishnadas offered respects to her. Vishakhadevi took
brought this new gopi to Shri Radha Thakurani. The new gopi offered her
obeisances in the dust of the lotus feet of Shri Radha. The sakhis seated the new
gopi in their midst. At that time, Shri Radharani applied some kumkum to the
bangle and made a tilak mark on the head of the new gopi, saying "This tilak must
remain on your forehead. From this day on, your name will be Shyamananda.
Now go." At this, Radha Thakurani, along with all her gopi friends vanished.
Dukhi Krishnadas's samadhi broke. In the water he could see in his reflection the

[p.343]
effulgent tilak mark the bangle had left on his forehead.
His heart was filled with wonder at the sight, and he thought to himself, "What
have I seen!" Saying this, he began to weep with joy. Thereafter, offering
hundreds and hundreds of prayers in the name of Shri Radha Thakurani, he
returned to the lotus feet of Shri Jiva Goswami.
Seeing the new tilak mark that shined so brilliantly on the forehead of Dukhi
Krishna das, Jiva Goswami was dumbstruck. He inquired as to its origin. Dukhi
Krishna das bowed before his master and with his eyes filled with tears, he related
the entire story to Jiva Goswami. Hearing this, Jiva Gsowami was supremely
happy. He said, "Don't reveal the story of this miracle to the people in general."
From this day on your name will be Shyamananda.
Noticing the change in Dukhi Krishnadas's name and tilak, the Vaishnava
community began to talk about him. Gradually word reached Ambika Kalna in
Gauda desh. Hearing that his disciple had changed his name and tilak, Hridaya
Caitanya became angry. He quickly left for Vrindavana. When he arrived at the
place where Krishnadas was staying, Krishnadas fell before his gurudev's lotus
feet, offering his dandavats. Shri Hridaya Caitanya, seeing the new tilak on his
disciple's forehead, became very angry and said, "Your conduct is abominable;
you are disgracing me!" In this way he chastised Dukhi Krishna Das and struck
him again and again as the Vaishnavas did their best to pacify Hridaya Chaitanya
Prabhu. Dukhi Krishna Das bore all his guru's chastisement with a cheerful face,
for he knew that he had never left the service of his guru maharaja.
That night, Shri Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu had a dream in which he saw Shri

[p.344]
Radha Thakurani. Shrimati Radharani scolded Hridaya Chaitanya, saying:
"Because Shri Dukhi Krishna das has pleased me greatly I have given him this
new name and tilak. Why have you instructed him differently?" Hridaya
Chaitanya fell at the feet of the princess of Vraja praying for forgiveness, realizing
that he had committed a great offense.
The next morning Shri Hridaya Chaitanya called Shyamananda Prabhu to his side
and affectionately embraced him again and again. With tears of ecstasy in his
eyes he told his disciple: "You are most fortunate." A few days later Shri Hridaya
Chaitanya left Vrajadhama. A few days later, Jiva Goswami ordered Shyamananda
Prabhu to return to Gauda Desh.
Shyamanda Prabhu, Shrinivasa Acharya, and Narottama das Thakura in great
happiness had spent many days studying the Goswami scriptures under the
tutelage of Shri Jiva Goswami and moving through Vrindavana as humble
beggars, practicing Madhukari. These three devotees practiced their madhukari
and performed their bhajan as one. In this way, they were very fixed and
determined in their devotional service.
In this way, having been invited to do so by the goswamis the three of them went
to preach the message of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu especially as found in
scriptures of the Goswamis. One day, Jova Goswami called the three of them
together and let them know how to fulfill the will of the Goswamis. The three of
them bowed their heads and receiving the orders of Jiva Goswami with great
respect. After this, on an auspicious day, after seeing Jiva Goswami and having
been entrusted by him with the scriptures of the Goswamis, the three of them

[p.345]
started for Gauda-desh.
On the way, the King of Vanavishnupura, Birhambir had their scriptures stolen by
some of his men. For the purpose of recovering the stolen scriptures, Srinivas
Acharya stayed behind. Shri Narottam Thakura went on to Kheturigram and
Shyamananda Prabhu returned to Ambika Kalna. Upon arriving in Ambika Kalna,
Shyamananda Prabhu offered his respects at the lotus feet of Hridaya Chaitanya.
The two of them embraced each other with great joy and affection, and Hridaya
Chaitanya inquired after the welfare of the great devotees and goswamis in
Vrindavan. Upon hearing of the theft of the Goswamis scriptures, Hridaya
Chaitanya was deeply shocked and disappointed. Soon Shyamananda was once
again offering serving the lotus feet of his gurudeva Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu.
After a few days, Shyamananda Prabhu became completely absorbed in guruseva
and his happiness grew day by day. Almost all of the personal associates of Shri
Caitanya in Utkala desh had by that time one by one disappeared and entered into
the unmanifest pastimes of the Lord. The preaching of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's
message had almost disappeared. Shri Hridaya Chaitanya, upon hearing all this
became especially concerned. At that time he ordered Shri Shyamananda Prabhu
to go to Utkala desh and preach the message of the Goswamis and the teachings of
Shri Chaitanya. As he was leaving his gurudeva behind, Shyamananda felt great
pain within his heart. Understanding his heart, Hridaya Chaitanya called
Shayamananda to him and made him understand his concern. Having no other
course open to him, Shyamananda Prabhu left for Utkala taking his guru's orders
on his head. On his way to Utkala, he passed his old village of Dharenda

[p.346]
Bahadurpur. Seeing their own dear Dukhi returning home after having been gone
for so long, the townspeople were extremely happy. For a few days he stayed
there and preached the holy gospel of Shri Chaitanya. Many people heard him and
were enchanted by him and took shelter at his lotus feet.
Thereafter he came to a town called Dandeshwar. There Shri Krishna Mandala
had formerly lived. Shyamananda Prabhu blessed the town of Dandeshwar and
the devotees who lived there by his holy association, to the extreme happiness of
all of them. For many days he preached Harikatha and held a great festival there.
Many people, upon hearing the divine message of Shyamananda Prabhu, were
charmed by his saintliness and became his disciples. Finally, Shyamananda
Prabhu arrived in Utkala, sanctifying the earth there with his holy presence and
again he began preaching the message of Shri Chaitanya everywhere.
On the banks of the Suvarna-rekha river lived was a pious zamindar by the name
of Shri Achyutadeva. Rasikananda was the name of his only son. From the time
he was a little boy, he was a paragon of Krishna-bhakti. For the sake of his
education his father had engaged some learned scholars to teach him.
Rasikananda would study at the place of the Pandits. But he had no interest in
wordly knowledge. In everything he would study he would find Hari-bhakti to be
the ultimate conclusion. grew anxious to take shelter of the lotus feet of a
Vaishnava guru. One day he was sitting alone, thinking. At that time he heard a
divine voice say, "Rasikananda! Don't sit there brooding. Very soon a great
devotee, a mahabhagavat named Shyamananda Prabhu will arrive here; go to him
and take shelter of his lotus feet." Hearing that divine voice, he became

[p.347]
somewhat encouraged. From that time on, he became very eager to see
Shyamananda Prabhu and was always looking down the road for his arrival.
A few days later Shri Shyamananda Prabhu along with his disciples made his
auspicious arrival at the house of Rasikananda dev in the village called Rohini on
the banks of the Suvarna-rekha. Shri Rasikananda dev's bliss knew no bounds.
He offered his full obeisances in a mood of great humility and took Shri
Shyamananda Prabhu within his house, where he offered him the traditional puja,
and made all his friends, relatives, and children surrender at Shyamananda's lotus
feet. It was arranged that on an auspicious day, Shyamananda Prabhu would
initiate Rasikananda dev Prabhu into the Radha-Krishna mantra. They began the
chanting of Hare Krishna in sankirtan in the home of deva with all the other
devotees, inviting all the friends and relatives to take part. Everyone in the village
engaged in Sankirtan-yajna, and took darshan of Shyamananda Prabhu. Amazed
by his wonderful explanations of the message of Gaura-Nityananda, they all took
shelter of his lotus feet. In this way, the town of Rohini had many disciples of
Shri Shyamananda Prabhu.
In the town of Rohini was a big yogi named Damodara. One day he went to take
darshan of Shri Shyamananda Prabhu. From a long way off he say a divine
effulgence as bright as the sun emanated from Shyamananda Prabhu blinding his
vision. Thereafter, as he approached that great acarya, he fell at his lotus feet and
took shelter ther, offering many prayers in submission. Returning the respect
shown to him by the yogi Shyamananda Prabhu with tears in his eyes, said, "If
your holiness wishes to develop divine purity, please just always chant the holy

[p.348]
names of Gaura and Nityananda. The Lord is supremely merciful. If you only do
this, He will bestow Krishna-prema upon you. " Hearing what Shyamananda
Prabhu had said, Yogi Damodara's heart melted. He replied, "If you will kindly
give me your mercy, I shall worship the lotus feet of Gaura-Nityananda from now
on." Shyamananda Prabhu gave the yogi his blessings, and bestowed his
transcendental mercy upon him. Yogi Damodara became a great devotee of Shri
Shri Gaura Nitai. He used to constantly chant the holy name of Gaura and
Nityananda with tears of joy pouring from his eyes.
In Balaram Pura lived many rich people. Hearing the glories of Shyamananda
Prabhu the people there became very anxious to see him. The pious, faithful, and
saintly people there began to pray with great earnestness for Shyamananda Prabhu
to come and visit Balaram Pura. Soon, Shyamananda Prabhu gave them his
mercy. He promised to respond to the invitation. Not long after this, Shyamananda
Prabhu arrived in Balarama Pura with adev and Yogi Damodara, as well as many
of his other disciples and devotees. The ecstasy of the saintly persons in Balaram
Pura was boundless. They offered puja to the lotus feet of Shyamananda Prabhu,
and conducted their bhajan in a very beautiful way, observing all the proper rules
and regulations of the shastras. A few days later they held a big kirtan and harikatha festival in Balarama Pura. Many people came and surrendered at the lotus
feet of Shri Shyamananda Prabhu.
After this Shyamananda Prabhu went to Nrishinga Pura. In Nrishinga Pura there
was quite a large faction of atheists, agnostics, and blasphemers. After a few days,
Shyamananda Prabhu held a sankirtan festival. The agnostics and atheistic pandits

[p.349]
went to see Shyamananda Prabhu and listened to his sweet and nectarean
explanations of Hari-katha. By hearing his words, their hearts were moved. They
accepted the shelter of Shyamananda Prabhu's lotus feet.
Day after day the news of Shyamananda's glories reached Utkala. From Nrishinga
Pura, Shyamananda Prabhu went to Shri Gopi Vallabha Pura. There many
wealthy people lived. After taking darshan of his lotus feet, they were astonished.
Almost all of them accepted shelter at the lotus feet of Shri Shyamananda Prabhu.
They prayed at his feet that he might install some deities, that they may engage in
deity worship. They begged him with great earnestness to do this. Soon
thereafter, the devotees had established a temple of the Lord with a kirtan hall, a
shelter for bhoga to be kept, and a special kitchen where the Lord's meals could be
prepared, as well as an ashram where the deities servants could live, and a guest
house for visiting Vaishnavas. Near the temple they also constructed a small pond
and beautiful gardens. Soon thereafter a great festival was held, and at that time
Shri Shyamananda Prabhu installed the deities: Radha Govinda. When the
installation ceremonies and festival were concluded, Shyamananda Prabhu left for
his hometown of Utkala. Seeing the charming beauty of the Radha-Govinda
deities, everyone felt peace in their hearts. After Shyamananda Prabhu had left for
Utkala, the residents of Gopi Vallabha Pura entrusted the responsibiity of service
to the Deities to Rasikananda Prabhu.
Ariving in Utkala Pura, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu preached the message of Gaura
Nityananda, and finally, returning to Ambika-Kalna, he payed his respects at the
lotus feet of Shri Hridaya Chaitanya. Having offered his respects and prayers to

[p.350]
Hridaya Chaitanya Prabhu, he told him all about his successful preaching of the
message of Gaura Nityananda throughout Utkala, Dandeshwar, Rohini, Balaram
Pura, Nrishinga Pura, and Gopi Vallabha Pura. Hearing of the victories of his
disciple, Shri Hridaya Chaitanya affectionately embraced Shyamananda Prabhu.
After some time Shri Shyamananda Prabhu was invited to the famous festival in
Kheturigram, the birthplace of Narottam das Thakura. After getting this
invitation, Shyamananda Prabhu, along with his disciples, set off in the direction
of Kheturigram. After arriving in Kheturigram, he found his old lifelong friends,
Narottam Thakura and Shrinivas Acharya. Heartily embracing one another they
floated in the waves of happiness. At that festival, Jahnava Mata, Shri
Raghunandan Thakura, Shri Achyutananda, and Shri Vrindavana Das Thakura,
other eternal associates of Shri Gaurachandra, as well as many great souls and
important devotees graced everyone there by their auspicious presence. When the
festival had come to an end, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu bade farewell to all the
assembled devotees and again turned his face in the direction of Utkala in order to
make his return journey.
On his way back to Gauda Desh, he stopped off in the town of Kanthak Nagara at
the house of Gadadhara Das Thakur, in Yajigrama at the house of Shrinivas
Acharya, and in Shri Khanda at the house of Raghunandana Thakura. After this
time, many of the eternal associates of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu passed away
from this earth and entered into the eternal unmanifest pastimes of the Lord.
After some time, Shyamananda reached Utkala. Moving from one devotee's house
to the next, he went from one town to the next, and graced many devotees with his

[p.351]
blessings. Soon he arrived in Shri Gopi Vallabha Pura. At this time he heard
news of the passing away of his guru, Shri Hridaya Chaitanya. Hearing this tragic
news, Shri Shyamananda Prabhu fainted. After regaining consciousness he wept
and wept for a long time. He fell into a state of complete anxiety,
disappointement and bewilderment. That night, however, he had a dream of
Hridaya Chaitanya, and was encouraged by him to preach.
From Utkala desh, the glories of Shyamananda Prabhu were preached to the four
directions. As a result of his influence the constant worship and service of Gaura
and Nityananda was established far and wide. Rasikananda,. Shri Murari,
Radhananda, Purushottama, Manohara, Cintamani, Balabhadra, Shri Jagadishvara,
Gadadhara, Anandananda and Shri Radha Mohan and others were the dearmost
confidential disciples of Shyamananda Prabhu.
Shrila Shymananda Prabhu, having been successful in his many preaching
campaigns returned to Gopi Vallabha Pura, and there, after some days a big
festival took place. After that, in the month of Asarh, on the day of
Krishnapratipada the great acharya, Shyamananda Prabhu entered into the eternal
lila of the Lord. His samadhi may be found in Gopi Vallabha Pura, where the
service of his deity goes on to this day.

Sita Thakurani
Shri Sita Thakurani is to be worshiped just as much as Sachidevi herself,
as the mother of the universe. She is the eternal wife of Shri Advaita Acharya.
She was the daughter of Shri Nrishinga Baduri. She was married to Shri Advaita

[p.352]
Acharya in Phuliya Nagara. After their wedding, Advaita Acharya went to Nadiya,
to live in Shantipura. Sita Thakurani was always absorbed in vatsalya prema for
Shri Gaurasundara Prabhu, and, out of parental concern used to instruct
Jagannatha Mishra on how to care for the boy. Shri Krishna Dasa Kaviraja
Goswami has described the birth celebration at the house of Jagannatha Mishra
upon the advent of the Lord, giving special attention to the position of Shri Sita
Thakurani. Advaita Acharya's wife, worshipable by all the three worlds was Sita
Thakurani. Taking the Acharya's orders on her head, she had come to take a look
at this new child, this jewel of jewels, and to offer him presents.
On the eve of his son's advent Shri Jagannatha Mishra, seeing the
imminent signs of his child's arrival, sent word to Advaita Acharya in Shantipura
that the long-awaited child was being born. Hearing news of the advent of this
unprecedented child, Advaita Acharya floated inthe waves of ecstasy. With Shri
Haridasa Thakura, he went to bathe in the river, and, after much dancing and song,
he sent his wife to go quickly to Mayapura in Navadwipa.
According to Gaura-Ganodesh Dipika, Shri Sita Thakurani is Yogamaya.
The Gaura-Parshada-Charitvali says that in Krishna Lila, she was Purnamasi, the
mother of Sandipani Muni, grandmother of Madhumangal and Nandimukhi and a
disciple of Narada Muni. (Gaura-Ganodesha-dipika, however, says that
Paurnamasi in Krishna-lila became Shri Govinda Acharya in Chaitanya lila.)In
Dvapara-yuga, during the celebration of Krishna's birth ceremony, she was present
in the house of Nanda, and at that time gave Nanda and Yashoda many
instructions on how to care for the child. The Chaitanya Charitamrits gives the
following account of Sita Thakurani's visit to the house of Jagannatha Mishra after
the birth of the Lord:
"One day, shortly after Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu was born, Advaita
Acharya's wife, Sitadevi, who is worshipable by the whole world, taking
permission of her husband, went to see that topmost child with all kinds of gifts
and presents. She brought different kinds of golden ornaments, including banlges
for the hand, armlets, neclaces, and anklets. There were also tiger nails set in gold,
waist decorations of silk and lace, ornaments for the hands and legs, nicely printed

[p.353]
silken saris and a child's garment, also made of silk. Many other riches, including
gold and silver coinds, were also presented for the child. Riding in a palanquin
covered with cloth and accompanied by maidservants, Sita Thakurani came to the
houe of Jagannatha Mishra, bringing with her many auspicious articles such as
fesh grass, paddy, gorocana, turmeric, kunkuma, and sandalwood. All these
presentations filled a big basket. When Sita Thakurani came to the house of
Sachidevi, bringing with her many kinds of eatables, dresses, and other gifts, she
was astonished to see the newly born child, for she appreciated that except for a
difference in color, the child was directly Krishna of Gokula Himself. Seeing the
transcendental bodily effulgence of the child, each of His nicely constructed limbs
full of auspicious signs and resembling a form of gold, Sita Thakurani was very
much pleased, and because of her maternal affection, she felt as if her heart were
melting. She blessed the newly born child by placing fresh grass and paddy on
His head and saying, "May You be blessed with a long duration of life." But being
afraid of ghosts and witches, she gave the child the name Nimai. On the day that
the mother and son took bath and left the maternity room, sita Thakurani gave
them all kinds of ornaments and garments, and then also honored Jagannatha
Mishra. then Sita Thakurani, being honored by mother Sachidevi and Jagannatha
Mishra, was greatly happy within her mind, and thus she returned home."
From that day on, Sita Thakurani would often come to Mayapura from
Shantipura, in order to teach Sachimata how to care for the new baby. She would
give her many different instructions on how to raise children. And after helping
with the child in this way, she would return to Shantipura. When it came time for
the child's birthday ceremony, Jagannatha Mishra and Sachidevi let the
worshipable Sita Thakurani be the first to offer the child his new clothes.
Advaita Acharya Prabhu also had a house in Navadwipa. There he would
live from time to time and discuss Krishna-katha with the devotees headed by
Shrivasa, diving and surfacing in the waves of joy until the break of dawn. After
Shri Gaurasundara's appearance, all the devotees prayed together with Shri
Advaita Acharya and Sita Thakurani that the child might live long in Mayapura
and have good fortune.

[p.354]
Sita Thakurani and Sachidevi were of one mind; the baby Nimai was their
life and soul. Every day Sita Thakurani would go to the house of Sachidevi and
help her with the care and nurturing of the boy. In the house of Jagannatha
Mishra, the divine child increased the pleasure of the eyes and minds of all the
devotees, just as the waxing moon gradually grows more brilliant with each
passing day.
After several years, when Jagannatha Mishra's son Vishvarupa—Nimai's
older brother—had grown up, he suddenly took sannyasa. The grief and agony of
Jagannatha Mishra and Sachidevi upon their son's leaving was great.
Gaurasundara was also dismayed and unhappy at his brother's separation. At that
time Advaita Acharya and Sita Thakurani consoled Jagannatha Mishra and Sita
Thakurani, and helped take care of Nimai.
Shrivasa Pandit's wife Malini Devi also was always very affectionate
towards the child, nurturing him and caring for him. She and Sachidevi were of
one mind in doing this.
After exhibiting his childhood pastimes, Nimai gradually progressed into
his Kishora-lila, or pastimes of youth. After some time, he went to Gaya and
revealed his true form and real purpose. Having returned from Gaya he gathered
all the devotees at the house of Shrivasa Angan for the purpose of beginning
kirtan. At that time, Advaita Acharya brought Sita Thakurani from Shantipura to
Mayapura, and, having arrived there was the first to worship the lotus feet of Shri
Chaitanya.
Gradually Shri Gaurasundara began, in Navadwipa, to unfold his kirtan
pastimes, wishing to deliver the fallen souls. As time went by he took sannyasa
and turned his face towards Vrindavan, and ran off, half mad into the jungle in
search for Shri Krishna. Upon hearing this, Shri Sita Thakurani spent four days
with Sachidevi, who, plunged in the darkness of separation as if the sun had left
the sky forever, lay fallen on the ground like one near death.
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, being bound by the ropes of love, was unable
to go to Vrindavan, but was drawn to return to Shantipura. When he arrived in

[p.355]
Shantipura, Advaita Acharya and Sita Thakurani felt as if their life has returned.
After having fasted for four days, Shri Gaurasundara accepted prasada cooked by
the hand of SitaThakurani.
Previous to taking sannyasa also, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu along with
Nityananda Prabhu would, from time to time go to the house of Advaita in
Shantipura, where they would have a festival and perform Krishna-nama-lila
kirtan all day and all night. The beautiful nature of this subject has been described
by Shri Parameshvari Das Thakura in his Shri Pada Kalpataru as follows:
One day the Lord laughed, having arrived in the temple of Shri Advaita and thus
the son of Sachi took his seat. Along with Nityananda, Advaita sat down, and the
two of them began playfully assessing the idea of having a festival. Hearing all
this, Sita Thakurani entered smiling. At that time, in sweet words which made the
minds of those who heard them blissful, the son of Sachi ruled that there must be
a great festival. He said, "Listen Sita Thakurani: we shall extend invitations to all
the different Vaishnavas who live nearby. Let whoever hears the sound of our
song, resounding through the air, come and join us. We shall invite one and all."
Saying this, Shri Gaurachandra gave orders to the devotees saying, "You, invite
the Vaishnavas." "You, ready the mridanga and karatalas." "You, prepare
sandalwood and aguru for distribution." "Have everything ready at the ghat."
"Carrying out these assignments expertly, and after garlanding the devotees with
flower garlands, the devotees shall gather together in a circle for an uproarious
kirtan."
Hearing the words of Mahaprabhu, the devotees followed his orders with
great affection, collecting garlands, sandalwood, betel, ghee, honey, and milk, and
everything else essential for worhsiping the Lord. The different gifts and fragrant
articles for the devotees and the Lord were then distributed in the proper ways.
The kirtan began at midday. At that time everyone chanted 'Hari! Hari!' and the
mridanga made the whole kirtan auspicious. Thus swims Parameshavara dasa in
the rasik pastimes of the Lord.
After Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu took sannyasa and went to live in

[p.356]
Jagannatha Puri, Shri Advaita Acharya and Sita Thakurani used to go and visit
him each year, bringing their son Achyutananda with them. On one such
occasion, Sita Thakurani prepared some of the Lord's favorite preparations for him
and invited Him to their home to take lunch. Simply to increase their ecstasy, the
Lord, who was always absorbed in Krishna Nam, honored their invitation and took
lunch in the home of Advaita and Sita. Sita Thakurani, being always overwhelmed
with vatsalya-prema treated him as affectionately as if he were her own son. The
Lord himself also treated her with the same kind of regard and affection that he
had for Sachidevi herself. Shri Sita Thakurani bore three sons, Achutananda,
Krishna Mishra and Gopala Mishra, who were followers of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu.
According to Bhakti-Ratnakara, Shri Sita Thakurani's father was Shri Nrishimha
Baduri. Sita Thakurani also had a sister, Shri. According to the GauraGanoddesha Dipika, Sita Thakurani, the wife of Shri Advaita Acharya, is
Yogamaya, and her sister Shri is the prakasha, or manifestation, of Yogamaya.
(yogamaya bhagavati, grihini tasya sampratam, sita rupenavatirna, "shri" namni tat
prakashatah)

Shrivasa Thakura

That person who was the Vyasa of Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's
pastimes—Shrimad Vrindavan Das Thakura—speaks of Shrivas Pandit in his Shri
Chaitanya Bhagavata:
"In Navadwip Dham lived the holy Pandit Shri Shrivas,
And at his temple Caitanya performed his sweet vilas.
Srivas and his brothers always sang the holy name,
And did their Krishna-puja and Ganges bath three times a day."
Shrivas, Shrirama, Shripati and Shrinidhi were four brothers. They used

[p.357]
to live in Shri Hatta, but after some time they moved to Navadwip Dham and
lived there. The four brothers used to go to the house of Advaita Acharya to listen
to the Bhagavatam class, to perform Nam-sankirtan, and to participate in different
Vaishnava activities. They were all great friends with Shri Jagannatha Mishra,
the father of Shri Chaitanya. The four of them used to love to hear the bhagavatam
and perform sankirtan together. As a result of their devotion, they could
understand that Shri Krishna Himself would soon appear in the house of
Jagannatha Mishra. Shrivas Pandit's wife was Malinidevi. She was the contant
friend of Sachidevi and the two of them would derive great satisfaction in one
another's company.
Seeing the terrible situation of the living entities in Kaliyuga, the devotees
were greatly distressed, and, in order to deliver the fallen souls, began to pray for
the appearance of God Himself. The Lord heard the prayers of his devotees. In
1407 Saka era, in the month of Phalguana, on the full moon night Shri Hari
Himself advented in the home of Jagannatha Mishra in Mayapura. With his
appearance in this world, everything became auspicious. The world was filled
with the holy name. When Shri Advaita, who came from Shantipura, could
understand that Shri Hari himself had appeared, he went to Shrivasa and all the
other devotees and made them understand as well the importance of His divine
appearance. Shrivas Pandit's wife Malini was devoted to Sachidevi and took care
of her like a personal nurse. Shrivas Pandit was constantly at the house of
Jagannatha Mishra; it was as if he was Jagannatha Mishra's shadow.
What the Supreme Lord may do from one moment to the next even he

[p.358]
himself may not know; how than can anyone else understand his movements? At
the time of Mahaprabhu's childhood, he exhibited many supernatural pastimes, but
being bewildered by the Lord's Yogamaya potency, the devotees could not
understand them. At the time of his advent all the hearts of the devotees were
filled with parental affection. Shrivas Pandita and Malini Devi, in nurturing and
raising up the darling boy of Shachi Devi and Jagannatha Mishra gave him
instruction on many subjects. And so, Shri Gaurasundara came to accept Shrivasa
Pandit and Malini Devi as a second mother and father.
One day, during the time of Mahaprabhu's impudent schoolboy pranks and
his pastimes of scholarship, Shrivasa Pandit came to the boy and instructed him as
follows: "Why do people study? What do they really want to know and
understand? What is the true object of knowledge? Krishna and Krishna-bhakti.
For if one studies so many subjects, but has no understanding of Krishna, all his
learning is useless. You are reading and studying and hearing so many lectures on
different subjects. But you should perform Krishna-bhajan and apply your
intelligence to that." Hearing this, mahaprabhu smiled and said, "By your mercy it
shall certainly come to pass. By your mercy I shall certainly attain Krishna
bhakti."
At length, Mahaprabhu, having gone to the holy city of Gaya where He
accepted mantra initiation from Ishvara Puri, began to play the role for which he
had come to this world. He began to manifest prema-bhakti within this world. One
day, Mahaprabhu, manifesting his mood of the Supreme Controller, God Himself,
came to the house of Shrivas Thakura and spoke as follows: "To whom have you

[p.359]
performed worship? On whom have you meditated? Now see Him! Look upon
the object of your worship! Shirvasa! Who have you worshipped? Look directly
upon Him whom you have worshipped." Saying these words, Mahaprabhu
entered the Deity room of Vishnu and boldly sat upon the altar, manifesting a fourarmed form with conch, lotus, club, and chakra. Upon seeing Chaitanya
Mahparabhu in this divine form, Shrivas Pandit was shocked and paralyzed with
wonder.
At that time the Lord told Shrivas, "I have heard your loud Sankirtan and
Advaita's roaring of the holy name of Krishna! And hearing their calls I have left
Vaikuntha and appeared here in this material world with my eternal associates. I
have come to punish the wicked and deliver the saintly. If you want to become
fearless perform my sankirtan. Listening to these fearless words of Mahaprabhu
Shrivasa Pandit fell to the earth offering his prostrated obeisances and recited the
following prayers:
"Unto the lotus feet of Shri Chaitanya Vishvambhara
(whose dress is like a yellow cloud) I make my namaskara.
I bow before that Krishna (who is mother Sachi's son)
Bedecked with gunja-mala and peacock plume, bright as the sun,
Bright as a million moons whose cooling rays eclipse the stars;
To Ganga Das Pandit's Nimai, a hundred namaskaras.
With horn of buffalo, and cowherd stick, and bamboo flute,
Lord Krishna played, and you are He, the Godhead, Supreme Truth.
The Vedas sing the glories of Krishna—Nanda Kumara;

[p.360]
And thou art he, and so before your feet, my namaskara.

My birth and work have reached complete fulfillment here today.
My life has dawned anew, auspiciousness is mine today.
My ancestors have surely found salvation on this day.
My home and wealth have reached their true perfection on this day.
My fortune knows no earthly bounds upon this holy day—
The blissful vision of your holy feet blessed me today."

In this way, Shrivasa offered different prayers and hymns. Shri Chaitanya
Maharpabhu was very kind to Shrivas, and within the house of Shrivasa he gave
darshan of his divine form to all his eternal associates and devotees. When
Shrivasa Pandit's niece Narayani came before him, Mahaprabhu, upon seeing her,
said, "Narayani, chant Krishna, Krishna!" Chaitanya Bhagvata records, "Although
she was only a four year old girl, her behavior was unusual. Chanting "Krishna,
Krishna!" again and again, she fell on the ground stunned in ecstasy with tears in
her eyes."
The little girl, Narayani, was stunned in ecstasy and chanted Krishna again
and again with tears in her eyes. Seeing her tears of ecstasy, Shrivasa Pandit's wife
as well as all the other devotees also cried tears of ecstasy. As a consequence,
Shrivasa Angana was filled with a wonderful and beautiful impression of Krishnaprema.
In the house of Shrivasa there was a maidservant named Dukhi (unhappy).

[p.361]
Every day she would bring water to bathe Mahaprabhu. One day the Lord asked
Shrivasa, "Who is bringing this water?" Shrivasa said, "Dukhi is bringing the
water." The Lord said, "From now own her name will be Sukhi (happy). Since she
is engaged in service to Bhagavan and the Vaishnavas, she cannot be Dukhi
(unhappy). She must be Sukhi (happy).
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu performed many different pastimes in the house of
Shrivasa. Gradually, Nityananda Prabhu came to Nabadwip dham and met Shri
Chaitanya. In the company of Shri Nityananda Prabhu, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu began performing different Sankirtana pastimes. Their Sankirtana
headquarters was Shrivas Angan. Shri Nityananda Prabhu Himself personally
resided at Shrivasa Angan, and Shri Malini Devi, the wife of Shrivasa served Him
as if he were her very own son. Nityananda Prabhu is Baladev Himself. He used
to perform the pastimes of an avadhuta. He would dwell in the plane of Krishna
prema, always overwhelmed by divine ecstasy. He was never burdened by any
consideration of bodily ornamentation. Thus he was known as an avadhuta.
One day, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, along with his personal expansions
and eternal associates, went to the house of Shrivasa to perform Sankirtan and
dance. At that time the only son of Shrivasa became stricken with some unusual
ailment and passed away. Within the ladies chambers all the women were crying
and lamenting with great sobs and weeping and wailing. Shrivasa Pandit,
understanding everything, entered into the ladies chambers. There he saw that his
son had passed away, returning to the spiritual abode. With supreme gravity, this
great knower of divine truth consoled the women. "You all know the glories of

[p.362]
Krishna," he said, "Therefore, please don't cry. Check your tears. Even a great
sinner who hears the holy name at the time of death attains the divine abode of
Krishna. That very Krishna Himself—whose glories are sung by his servants like
Brahma and Shiva—is dancing among you. It is certain, therefore, that this boy
has returned to the Lord's supreme abode. Why then should there be any cause for
lamentation. At this time you should rather honor this boy as one who was
blessed with the supreme good fortune of attaining the ultimate goal of life."
In this way, Shrivasa Thakura, after giving many different instructions on
divine truth to the ladies, finally said, "If you are unable to check your family
sentiment and stop crying right now, I will give you good reason to cry later. At
this moment, Shri Gaurasundara, the Lord of Gokula Himself, is performing
sankirtan with his devotees in my house. If by your crying you disturb his
happiness for one moment, then I shall immediately go jump in the Ganges and
give up my life by drowning!"
"It is by Krishna's will alone that evevery blade of grass moves. Nothing
comes to pass without his will. Whatever we may imagine to be good, bad,
knowledge, or ignorance is all his will. Knowing whatever Krishna wants to be
divine good, reject your own desires as so much useless garbage. Lord Krishna
gives, and Krishna takes away. Krishna protects and nurtures all. Krishna gives
life and takes it away according to his will. According to his will everything lives
and dies. To contradict the will of God will be a useless attempt. It will only bring
sorrow. Therfore, giving up all your lamentation, listen to the holy name of
Krishna; by doing so you will attain the highest ecstasy and completely fulfill your

[p.363]
heart's desire.
After giving all these instructions, Shrivasa Thakura went outside and
rejoined the great kirtan of Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu in which the Lord was
absorbed in singing the holy name of Krishna and dancing. Leaving the thought
of their dead child behind, the ladies listened to the kirtan of Shri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In this way the kirtan continued until late at night. The sankirtan
gradually came to an end and everyone rested. At that time Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu said, "Today within my mind I felt that some great sorrow has struck
this house." Shrivasa Pandit said, "O my Lord, how can there be any sorrow
here? You have brought the highest delight to this house by the sweet kirtan that
has emanated from your lotus mouth."
The Lord said, "Shrivasa, how is it that there was no ananda in the kirtan
today? Has something inauspicious befallen your family?" Shrivasa said, "O my
Lord! You are all-auspicious. As long as you are present here how can anything
inauspicious take place? At last the devotees came to know that Shrivasa Thakur's
only son had just died.
Upon hearing this, Lord Gauranga cried, "Alas, alas! The thought of this
great tragedy pains me worse than death. Why did you not tell me of this most
unfortunate event?" At this, Shrivasa Pandit said, "Hear me, O Lord; I could not
break the flow of your rasa-kirtan. A body died, O Lord, what need is there for
sorrow? If everyone in the universe had died, I would still experience the greatest
happiness just by looking upon You. If I had broken the flow of your kirtan and
stopped you from dancing, taht would have been a fate worse than death. And so I

[p.364]
did not want to disturb your kirtan, for fear of the great disaster that would have
taken place as a result of such ugly talk."
Seeing such deep determination in Shrivasa Thakura, Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu began to weep. He said, "Not knowing of this lamentation for the
son of Shrivasa, but bewildered by the ecstasy of Krishna-prema, how could I
renounce such association?" Hearing these words, everyone thought deeply
within themselves.
After this, Mahaprabhu went to the place where the dead child lay and
touched him, saying, "O boy! Why did you renounce Shrivasa Pandit and go
away?" At his touch, life returned to the boy and, after offering obeisances to Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, the boy said, "O my Lord! You are the creator and
destroyer of everything. You give life and take it away. You are the Supreme
Lord of all. Nothing can be done without your decree. As long as it is decreed by
you, one can stay here; when you decree, they can no longer remain. When your
sanction for our short stay on earth is removed we must move on. O Lord. Many
times I have taken birth, and many times I have died. But this time is different.
This time I died while having darshan of your beautiful lotus feet, and so I have
left this earth in complete happiness."
Saying this, the boy fell silent, having satisfied the inquiry of Shri
Gauranga Mahaprabhu. Hearing this unprecedented discourse from the mouth of
the dead child, everyone was astonished and all the devotees floated in the waves
of the ocean of bliss. In this way, beholding the wondrous pastimes of Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Shrivasa Pandit fell before the lotus feet of the Lord and

[p.365]
wept tears of ecstasy. Whereupon Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu said, "Nityananda
and I are your two sons. Always think of this and you will never experience the
sorrow of having lost a son. Nityananda and I are your sons. Therefore why
should you lament?" Hearing these words of mercy, the devotees filled the four
directions with cries of joy. Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu and Shri Nityananda
Prabhu were indebted to Shrivasa on account of his devotion and service. This is
proof that The Lord becomes indebted to his devotees.
When Chaitanya Mahaprabhu tok sannyasa Shrivasa Pandit returned to
Kumara Hatta and lived there. Now and then he and his brothers would go to
Jagannatha Puri to have darshan of Mahaprabhu. Sometimes he would go to
Nabadwipa-Mayapura to see Sachidevi, and at that time he would stay in his house
there for a few days.
When Chaitanya Mahaprabhu returned to Bengal from Jagannatha Puri
after five years of his sannyasa, he would take darshan of Sachimata and the
Ganges he went by Kumarhatta and visited the house of Shrivasa Thakura there.
Chaitanya Bhagavata says, "After staying for a few days at the house of Advaita,
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu visited the home and temple of Shrivasa. Shri
Chaitanya Mahaprabhu gave Shrivasa a boon, saying, "There shall never be any
poverty or shortage in your home." Shrivasa Pandit with his three brothers always
served Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu with great happiness. Shrivasa Pandit is the
avatara of Narada Muni. He is a constant associate of the Lord who is plays a role
in all of the Lord's important pastimes.

[p.366]
Svarup Damodar Goswami
Shri Svarupa Damodara is an eternal associate and friend of Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu. Previously his name was Shri Purushottama Acharya. He lived in
Nabadwipa. He always stayed with Mahaprabhu. When Shriman Mahaprabhu
took sannyasa, he became half-mad. He went to Varanasi and took sannyasa from
a sannyasi named Chaitanyananda, who ordered him to study Vedanta and teach it
to the people in general.
Shri Purushottama Acharya did not accept the dress of a sannyasi, but only
gave up the shikha and sacred thread. His name became Svarupa. After this, taking
up the order of his sannyasa-guru, Shri Purushottama Acharya went to Jagannatha
Puri. At that time, he again met with Shri Chaitanya. The Chaitanya Charitamrita
(ML 10:102-104) records this meeting as follows: "One day, Svarupa Damodara
arrived. His mystic awareness of the Lord's inner purpose was deep and
unfathomable. He was an ocean of rasa. In his previous ashrama, his name had
been Purushottama Acharya. When he was in Nabadwipa, he had attained the
Lord's lotus feet. But when he saw the sannyasa of Shri Chaitanya, he went halfmad. And so, he went straight to Varanasi to take sannyasa.
In connection with Svarupa Damodara, Shrimad Krishnadasa Kaviraja
Goswami has written further, as follows: "Shri Svarupa Damodara was the limit of
scholarship; still, he did not generally converse with anyone. He kept to himself.
He liked to remain alone, and did not see others. He was the very embodiment of
Krishna-prem. He was like a second Mahaprabhu, in the sense that he fully
understood the Lord's conclusions on Krishna-tattva and Krishna-bhakti, and
could fully represent them. As such, whoever wanted to bring before the Lord a
book, poem, or song would first bring it to Svarupa Damodara, who would
examine it before the Lord would hear it. The Lord did not delight in hearing
literature and song which was opposed to the conclusions of bhakti
(bhaktisiddhanta-viruddha), or which contained rasabhasa, conflicting devotional
mellows. Therefore, Svarupa Damodara would examine these things, and if he
decided that they were pure, then he would arrange for the Lord to hear them.
Svarupa Damodara would sing for Shri Chaitanya the songs of Vidyapati,

[p.367]
Chandidasa, and Gita-Govinda, and this gave the Lord much pleasure. Svarupa
Damodara could sing like a Gandharva, and he knew the scriptures like Brihaspati,
the guru of the gods. No one was a greater soul than he. He was most dear to
Advaita and Nityananda and the life and soul of the devotees headed by Shrivasa
Thakura."
In this way, it is said that Svarupa Damodara was like a second form of
Mahaprabhu, in song he was like a Gandharva, and in scripture, he was like
Brihaspati. Svarupa Damodara was very expert in music as well as Vedic
scriptures. Shri Chaintaya used to call him Damodara, becasue of his expert
singing and musical skills. The name Damodara was given by Shri Chaitanya and
added tothe name given by his sannyasa guru. He was therefore known as Svarupa
Damodara. He compiled a book of music called Sangita-Damodara.
When anyone wanted to submit a song, a verse, or a book to Shriman
Mahaprabhu, they first had to submit it to the examination of Svarupa Damodara,
before it would be heard by the Lord. When Svarupa Damodara came from Kashi,
he submitted a verse before the Lord, glorifying Him. This verse has been
recorded by Kavi Karnapura in his Chaitanya Chandrodaya Nataka as follows:
heloddhunita khedaya vishadaya pronmila-damodarau
shamyacchastra vivadaya rasadaya cittarpitonmadaya
shashvad-bhaktivinodaya sa-madaya madhurya-maryadaya
shri chaitanya dayanidhe tava daya bhuyadamandodaya
"O Ocean of Mercy, Shri Chaitanya! Let that which easily drives away
whatever pain we have been experiencing in this material world; that which is allpurifying, that which manifests the greatest transcendental bliss; that which by its
sunrise casts away all the doubtful conclusions of the shastra; that which rains rasa
on our hearts and minds, rules our consciousness and thus causes jubilation; that
all-liberating, all-auspiciousness-giving, the limit of madhurya-rasa mercy of
yours—let it arise within our hearts. "

[p.368]
Shri Svarupa Damodara made his dandavats before the Lord, and the Lord
embraced him, saying, "Today I saw in a dream that you were arriving here.
Everything was just right. Just as one who is blind becomes happy getting eyes, so
I have become happy upon getting you."
Shri Svarupa Goswami said, "O Lord! Please forgive me. Forgetting you, I
deserted your lotus feet. Not having a trace of prema within me, I left your service,
and being sinful, I went to a foreign land. But, although I abandoned you, you
didn't abandon me. By the ropes of your mercy, you have bound me by the neck
and dragged me back to your lotus feet."
Hearing Svarupa Damodara saying these words in great humility, the Lord
again embraced him and said, "Shri Krishna is very kind. By his mercy we have
met once again."
Svarupa Damodara always stayed near the Lord. Whatever mood the Lord
was in, Svarupa Damodara would perform kirtan to augment the Lord's internal
sentiments. Around the same time that Svarupa Damodara came to Puri, Shri
Ramananda Raya arrived from Vidyanagara. Shri Ramananda Raya was a great
poet and could explain everything in a very elegant style. Shri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu heard rasatattva from Ramananda's mouth.
In the daytime, Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu used to perform kirtan with his
devotees. At night, in the company of Ramananda Raya and Svarupa Damodara,
he would relish the truths about the pastimes and mellows of Radha and Krishna.
In the same way that Lalita and Vishakha are the internal confidantes of Shri
Radha, Svarupa Damodara and Ramananda Raya are the internal confidantes of
Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu.
At the time of Shri Gaurasundara's final pastimes, Shri Svarupa Damodara
was constantly with the Lord. Shri Svarupa Damodara's right hand was
Raghunatha Dasa Goswami.
On the second day of the day of full moon in the month of Asharh, Shri

[p.369]
Svarupa Damodara Goswami passed away from this earth and entered into the
Lord's unmanifest pastimes.

Lives of the
Saints
Uddharana Datta Thakura
Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja Goswami has written: "Uddharana Datta Thakura,
the eleventh among the twelve cowherd boys, was an exalted devotee of Lord
Nityananda Prabhu. He worshiped the lotus feet of Lord Nityananda in all
respects." According to Gaura-ganodesa-dipika, "The devotee who was formerly
known as Subahu in Vraja, and who was one of the cowherd boys in Vrndavana
later appeared in Gaura-lila as Sri Uddharana Datta.
In his translation and commentary on Caitanya Caritamrta (CC Adi 11.41)
Sri A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami writes: "Uddharana Datta Thakura, previously
known as Sri Uddharana Dattta, was a resident of Saptagrama, which is situated
on the bank of the Saraswati River near the Trisbhigha railway station in the
district of Hugali. At the time of Uddharana Datta Thakura, Saptagrama was a
very big town, encompasing many other placesf such as Vasudeva-pura,
Bansabediya, Krsnapura, Nityananda-pura, Sivapura, Sanhanagara and
Saptagrama.
"Calcutta was developed under British rule by the influential mercantile
community and especially by the suvarna-vanik community who came from
Saptagrama to establish their businesses and homes all over Calcutta. They were
known as the Saptagrami mercantile community of Calcutta, and most of them
belonged to the Mullik and Sil families. More than half of Calcutta belonged to
this community, as did Srila Uddharana Datta Thaura. Our paternal family also
came from this district and belonged to the same community. The Mulliks of
Calcutta are divided into two families, namely, the Sil family and De family
whose members, intimately connected with the Mohammedan rules, received the
title Mullik.

[p.370]
"In the Caitanya-Bhagavata, Antya Khanda chapter six, it is said that
Uddharana Datta was an extremely elevated and liberal Vaisnva. He was born
with the right to worship Nityananda Prabhu. It is also stated that Nityananda
Prabhu, after staying for some time in Khadadaha, came to Saptagrama and stayed
in the house of Uddharana Datta. The suvarna-vanik community to which
Uddhaana Datta belonged was actually a Vaisnava community. Its members were
bankers and gold merchants (suvarna means "gold" and vanik means "merchant").
Long ago there was a misunderstanding between Balla Sena and the suvarna-vanik
community because of the great banker Gauri Sena. Balla Sena was taking loans
from Gari Sena and spending money extravagantly, and therefore Gauri Sena
stopped supplying money. Balla Sena took revenge by instigating a social
conspiracy to make the suvarna-vanik community was again elevated. It is said in
the Caitanya Bhagavata, yateka vanika-kula uddharan haite pavitra ha-ila dvidha
nahika ihate: there is no doubt that all the community members of the suvarnavanik society were again purified by Nityananda Prabhu.
In Saptagrama there is still a temple with a six-armed Deity of Sri Caitanya
Maharabhu that was personally worshipped by Srila Uddharan Datta Thakura. On
the right side of Sri Caitanya Maharabhu is a Deity of Sri Nityananda Prabhu and
on the left side, Gadadhara Pandita. There are also a Radha-Govinda murti and
salagrama-sila, and below the throne is a picture of Uddharana Datta Thakura. In
front of the temple there is now a big hall, and in front of the hall is a Madhavilata plant. The temple is in a very shady, cool, and nicely situated location. When
we returned from America in 1967, the executive committee members of this
temple invited us to visit it, and thus we had the opportunity to visit this temple
with some American students. Formerly, in our childhood, we visited this temple
with our parents because all the members in the suvarna-vanika community
enthusiastically take interest in this temple of Uddharana Datta Thakura. In the
Bengali year 1283 one babaji of the name Nitai dasa arranged for a donation of
twelve bighas of land for this temple. The management of the temple later
deteriorated, but then in 1306, thorugh the cooperation of the famous Balarama
Mullik of Hugali, who was a subjudge, and many rich suvarna-vanik community
members, the management of the temple improved greatly. Not more than fifty
years ago, one of the family members of Uddharan Datta Thakura named
Jagamohana Datta established a wooden Deity of Uddharan Datta Thakura in the

[p.371]
temple, but that deity is no longer there; at present, a picture of Uddharana Datta is
worshiped. It is understood, however, that the wooden Deity of Uddharana Datta
was taken away by Sri Madana-mohana Datta and is now being worshiped with a
salagrama-sila by Srinatha Datta.
Uddharana Datta Thakura was the manager of the estate of a big Zamindar
in Naihati, about one and a half miles north of Katwa. The relics of this royal
family are still visble near the Dainhata station. Since Uddharana Datta Thaura
was the manager of the estate, it was also known as Uddharana-pura. Uddharana
Datta Thakura installed Gaura-Nitai deities that were later brought to the house of
the Zamindar, which was known as Vanaoyarirbada. Srila Uddhaana Datta Thaura
remained a householder throughout his life. His father's name was Srikara Datta,
his mother's name was Bhadravati, and his son's name was Srinivasa Datta.
Vrndavana dasa Thakura writes as follows about Uddharana Thakura in his
Caitanya Bhagavata: "After Nityananda Prabhu stayed for many days in
Khadadaha, he went to Saptagrama.There is a famous ghata in Saptagrama at the
confluence of the three rivers which is celebrated as being the place of the seven
rsis. At that ghata on the Ganges the seven rsis had once performed penances in
order to attain the lotus feet of Govinda. Three divine goddesses come together at
that place: Yamuna, Saraswati, and Jahnavi. These three goddesses of rivers join
at the confluence of those three rivers. It is a most holy place within this world.
One may be delivered from all his sins just by seeing that place. Nityananda
Prabhu was extremely happy to see that place and bathed at that holy place with
all the devotees. Uddharana Datta was staying in a temple of the Lord on the banks
of that river when Nityananda Prabhu came to the triveni. When he saw
Nityananda, he offered his mind, body, and words to the holy feet of Nityananda
and worshiped him without any duplicity in his heart. As a result of the mercy of
Nityananda Prabhu, Uddharana Datta was qualified by constitution to worship and
serve Nityananda. Who can estimate his good fortune. Although he may appear to
take birth within this material world, Nityananda is by nature the Supreme
Controller, and he remains so every time he descends here. Nityananda is the
master, and Uddharana Datta was his servant birth after birth. Uddharana Datta
was from the vanik community, and he purified the two divisions of that
community by his devotion. Nityananda Prabhu delivered the vanik community
by his descent, and gave them the qualifications for prema-bhakti. Practically

[p.372]
everyone in Saptagrama was a vanik. The moonlike Nitai-canda frolicked in
kirtana within their midst. All the vaniks took shelter at the lotus feet of
Nityananda and worshiped him with great ecstasy. Seeing all the vaniks absorbed
in krsna-bhajana under the direction of Nityananda Prabhu the whole world was
amazed. Indeed the universe itself was astonished to witness the exalted greatness
of Nityananda Prabhu who delivered the lowest of men, the foolish and illiterate,
and the entire vanika community. In this way, Nityananda Prabhu performed
various pastimes of sankirtana in Saptagrama, delivering the inhabitants of
Saptagrama as well as hundreds of their descendants within the vanik community.
In the same way that the towns and villages of Nadia were filled with happiness
when Caitanya and Nitai had performed sankirtana there, Saptagrama was filled
with happiness at the pastimes of Nityananda."
After the disappearance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Nityananda Prabhu's
sakti, Sri Jahnava Mata came to Saptagrama and visited the house of Uddharana
Datta Thakura. At that time, Uddharana Datta Thakura had already passed away.
Uddharana Datta Thakura passed away on the 13th day of the dark moon in the
month of Pausa.

Srimad Vrndavan dasa Thakura

Srimad Vrndavan dasa Thakura's mother's name was Sri Narayani Devi. Narayani
Devi was the daughter of Srivas Thakura's brother. After the disappeareance of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Srivas Thakura went to live in Kumar Hatta. Srivasa
Thakura had three brothers: Sripati, Srirama and Srinidhi. He also had one son,
but at a young age, his son passed away, returning to the Lord's supreme abode.

Srivasa Thakura had previously lived in Sri Hatta, but because he wanted the

[p.373]
association of devotees he went to live on the banks of the Ganges in Nabadwip.
When Mahaprabhu revealed his divinity in the house of Srivasa, showing his true
self to the assembled devotees there, Narayani devi was only a four year old girl.
In the Caitanya Bhagavata it is written:

"The golden moon, Sri Gauranga, revealed himself as the soul of all souls.
At that time he ordered Narayani to chant the name of Krishna.
Although she was only four years old she became mad with love of God.
And crying, "O Krishna!" she swooned in ecstasy.
As she laid on the ground in a trance of bliss, her eyes filled with tears,
overwhelmed with divine love."

Narayani Devi's son was Vrindavana Das Thakura. In the Caitanya Bhagavata he
has written of how Narayani was the object of Caitanya Mahaprabhu's affection:

"As a result of her great piety, Narayani would get whatever remnants the Lord
might leave after eating. Although she was only an unschooled little girl, the Lord
would favor Srivas Thakur's niece by giving her the leftovers of food touched by
His holy lips."

Indeed it was by the mercy of the Lord's prasada that Vrindavan dasa Thakura
took birth in the womb of Narayani as the incarnation of Vyasa. Sri Gauranga and
Sri Nityananda were the very life and soul of Vrindavana dasa Thakura. About

[p.374]
the father of Vrindavana dasa Thakrua little is mentioned any;where. Apart from
his relationship with Narayani, Vrinavana, not much is known of Vrindavan das
Thakura's ancestry.

In his commentary on the Caitanya Bhagavata, Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
Thakura: "At the ancestral home of Malini-devi [the wife of Srivasa Thakura]
Vrindavana dasa played as a small boy growing up. There he was nourished and
cared after just like a valuable gem."

One may find many facts regarding the life of Vrindavana Dasa by going to
Mamagachi, the village where Sri Narayani's wedding took place. Soon
thereafter, in Magagachi, while Vrindavana dasa was still within the womb
Narayani became a widow. In the small room of a poor brahmana, she lived in
great poverty and hardship as a maidservant in the house of Vasudeva Dutt.
Vrindavana Dasa Thakura was born, and soon began his studies. Vrindavana Dasa
Thakura took birth four years after Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu accepted sannyasa.
When Mahaprabhu had disappeared from this world and entered into his aprakritalila, Vrindavana Das was barely twenty years old.

Soon thereafter, Vrindavan Das Thakura accepted initiation from Sri Nityananda
Prabhu. He is Nityananda's eternal servant. Sri Vrindavana Dasa Thakura went
with Sri Jahnava-devi to the great festival in Kheturi gram. The poet Sri Krishna
das Kaviraja Goswami writes of the endless glories of Vrindavan das Thakura:

[p.375]
"Krishna's life was written in the Bhagavata of Vyasa.
The Vedavyasa for Sri Caitanya was Vrindavana Dasa.
Vrindavan das has called his book the "Caitanya Mangala"
Whoever hears his book no grave misfortunes shall befall.
Who reads it knows the glories of Caitanya and Nitai
And knows what Krishna-bhakti is, and how it is, and why.
His book contains the essence of the holy Bhagavata
And shows what Krishna-Bhakti is and what Bhakti is not.
An atheist who hears the Thakura's words will soon relent
And join the ranks of saintly men whose souls are heavensent.
No ordinary man can sing of God as he has sung:
The Lord Himself has spoken through the Thakur's holy tongue.
I bow a million times before the holy lotus feet
Of Sri Vrindavan das, whose verses are so sweet
That one who reads them shall be freed from this dark, mortal earth;
I bow a million times before the place where he took birth."

VAKRESHVARA PANDIT

At the time of Shriman Mahaprabhu's Nabadwipa-lila, as well as at the time of his

[p.376]
taking sannyasa and his staying in Jagannatha Puri, Vakreshvara Pandit was an
associate of the Lord. Shri Vakreshvara Pandit's birthplace is near the Triveni in a
place called Guptiparaya. Shri Vakreshvara Pandit was expert in song and
dancing. He once danced continuously for 72 hours. In the Gaura-GanodeshDipika, verse 71, it is stated that Vakreshvara Pandit was an incarnation of
Aniruddha, one of the quadruple expansions of Vishnu. When Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu played in dramatic performances in the house of Shrivasa Pandit,
Vakreshvara Pandit was one of the chief dancers. When Caitanya Mahaprabhu
first began his Sankirtan-lila Vakreshvara Pandit was a great singer and dancer.
When Shri Caitanya Mahaprabhu went to Ramkeli, Vakreshvara Pandit went with
him.
By the mercy of Vakreshvara Pandit Devananda Pandit was delivered.
Devananda Pandit had a reputation as a great scholar of the Bhagavatam from the
monist point of view. One day Srivasa Pandit went to hear his Bhagavata class,
and in the ecstasy of Krishna prem began to cry tears of joy upon hearing the holy
Bhagavata. At that time, some of Devananda Pandit's ignorant disciples, feeling
that Shrivasa Thakura was disrupting the class, threw Shrivas Pandit out of the
house where the Bhagavatam class was going on. Ignorant of the true position
both of the Lord's devotee and the holy Bhagavata , Devananda Pandit made no
protest after seeing this disrespectful treatment of a great Vaishnava with his own
eyes. In this way, he was responsible for Vaishnava-aparadha, an offense at the
lotus feet of a pure devotee.
When Caitanya Mahaprabhu manifest his divinity in Nabadwip in the house of

[p.377]
Shrivasa Thakura, it came to his attention that such an offense had been commited
a the lotus feet of that great devotee, Shrivasa Thakura. At that time, he gave
many instructions regarding the position of the book Bhagavata and the person
Bhagavata. He said, "If one studies the book Bhagavata but doesn't respect the
devotee Bhagavata, he is an offender. One may study the Bhagavata in that way
for hundreds and hundreds of kalpas without making any progress towards
Krishna-prema. The book Bhagavata and the person Bhagavata are nondifferent.
One who is sincere to know the meaning of the book Bhagavata must serve the
devotee Bhagavata. Mahaprabhu was indifferent towards Devananda Pandit and
did not bestow Krishna-prema upon him.
One day Vakreshvara Pandit was in the section of Nabadwip known as Kuliya at
the house of a devotee. That evening Vakreshvara Pandit was singing the glories
of the Lord and dancing in ecstasy. Devananda Pandit went there to find out what
was going on, and when he saw Vakreshvara Pandit enveloped in a mood of
ecstasy, he became fascinated by watching him. By and by a large crowd formed,
pressing forward to see Vakreshvara Pandit. Shri Devananda Pandit then pushed
the crowd back waving a cane in his hand, so that the divine kirtan and dancing of
Shri Vakreshvara Pandit Thakura was not disturbed. In this way for another six
hours into the night Vakreshvara Pandit continued his intense singing and dancing
in divine kirtana. Later, when Vakreshvara Pandit had taken a seat in order to
rest, Devananda Pandit fell before his feet, offering his obeisances in full
submission.
Vakreshavara Pandit was very happy with Devananda Pandit and his service, and

[p.378]
blessed him, saying, "May you have love of God." From that day on, Devananda
Pandit's Krishna Bhakti grew. One who gets the blessing of a devotee soon
achieves Krishna-bhakti.
After Caitanya Mahaprabhu had stayed in Jagannatha Puri for some time, he
returned to Kuliya in Nabadwipa, in order to visit his mother and see the Ganges.
At that time, he gave his mercy to Devananda Pandit. At that time he told
Devananda Pandit: "Because you have rendered service to Vakreshvara Pandit I
consider you to be one of my own. Vakreshvara Pandit is completely empowered
by the Lord. He has attained Krishna, and is full in Krishna-bhakti. Krishna has
made his home in the heart of Vakreshvara Pandit, and as Krishna dances within
his heart, so Vakreshavara Pandit himself dances. Whatever place Vakreshvara
Pandit blesses with his association becomes a holy place of pilgrimage more
sacred than all the holy places."
In this way Vrindavan Das Thakur writes of the glories of Shri Vakreshvara
Pandit. Although Shri Vakreshvara Pandit had previously lived in Nabadwip, he
left Nabadwip for Jagannatha Puri after Mahaprabhu took sannyasa, in order to
better serve the Lord. After this, he lived in Jagannatha Puri. The Caitanya
Caritamrita says, "Among the devotees who accompanied the Lord in Jagannatha
Puri, two of them—Paramananda Puri and Svarupa Damodara—were the heart
and soul of the Lord. Among the other devotees were Gadadhara, Jagadananda,
Sankara, Vakreshvara, Damodara Pandit, Thakura Haridasa, Raghunatha Vaidya,
and Ragunatha das. All these great devotees had been his associates from the
very begining of the Lord's pastimes, and when the Lord took up residence in

[p.379]
Jagannatha Puri they remained there to serve him faithfully.
It is said that Vakreshvara Pandit later lived in the house of Kashi Mishra. There
he established the Radha-Kanta deities. Shri Vakreshvara Pandit's disciple was
Gopal Guru Goswami. Shri Gopal Guru Goswami's disciple Dhayanachandra
Goswami has written a book called the Dhyan Chandra Paddhati. There he has
written of Vakreshvara Pandit: "Previously in Vrindavan he was Tungavidya Gopi
who was expert in singing and dancing. Later that same person appeared in the lila
of Caitanya Mahaprabhu and became known as Vakreshvara Pandit. He appeared
within this world as Vakreshavara Pandit on the day of Krishnapanchami in the
month of Asharh. He disappeared from this Earth and entered into the unmanifest
pastimes of the Lord on the sixth day of the full moon in the month of Asarh. "
One of Vakreshvara Pandit's family members was the poet Shri Govinda dev of
Utkala, who is known as an Oriyan. In the year 17, Gaur Era, he compiled a
scripture in the Orissan language named "Shri Gaura Krishnodaya." This book
has since been published by the great acarya of the Gaudiya Sampradaya, Srila
Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati Thakura Prabhupada, who recently entered into the
eternal pastimes of the Lord. In Gaura Krishnodaya Govinda Das describes the
life of Vakreshvara Pandit. There are many disciples of Vakreshvara Pandit and
they are known as Gaudiya Vaishnavas although they are from Orissa.
Vrindavan Das Thakura has described the great celebration of Caitanya
Mahaprabhu's sankirtan rasa in his Caitanya Bhagavata. There he mentions
Vakreshvara Pandit's participation in Mahaprabhu's sankirtan-lila as follows:
"To bless all souls with good fortune, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu appeared on this

[p.380]
earth in an enchanting form, which was like a doll of gold. To awaken the sleeping
souls of the age of Kali, he came to distribute the nectar of the holy name of
Krishna. The Lord descended to this earth in the midst of his eternal associates:
Nityananda, Advaita Acarya, Gadadhara, and all His pure devotees. When
Caitanya came, the khol and kartals sounded like the thunder of the clouds within
the temple of the Lord. Absorbed in different moods of ecstatic love, Sri Caitanya
would order everyone to chant the holy name of Krishna, saying, "bolo Haribol!"
Raising his arms to the sky, the Son of Sachi would dance in ecstasy. At that time
the beautiful Ramai and Shri Raghunandan also danced. Srivasa Thakura and
Haridas Thakura as well as Vakreshvara Pandit, Dvija Haridas, and Shankara
Pandit also danced. In this way, again and again glorifying their activities within
this world, floating on the ocean of ecstasy churned by them, Vrindavana Das
sings this Caitanya Bhagavata.
At the time of Rathayatra in Jagannatha Puri, there were four sampradayas. In
their midst Vakreshavara Pandit initiated a new sampradaya—of dancing. Shri
Krishnadas Kaviraj Goswami writes of the glories of Vakreshvara Pandit:
"Vakreshvara Pandit was the fifth branch of the Caitanya tree. He was a very dear
servant of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Once in the house of Srivasa Thakura he
danced with constant ecstasy for seventy-two hours. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
personally sang while Vakreshvara Pandit danced, and thus Vakreshvara Pandit
fell at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya and said, "O you whose face is as beautiful as
the full moon; please give me 10,000 Gandharvas. Let them sing as I dance, and
then I will be greatly happy." The Lord replied, "I have only one wing like you,

[p.381]
but if I had another, certainly I could fly like a bird."

Lives of the Saints
Vamshivadananda Thakura

On the Caitra Purnima, the full moon day of the month of Caitra, Sri
Vamsivadananda Thakura took birth within this world. It was a sweet moon in
1466, and everyone sang in great joy at the appearance of such a great soul.
Vamsivadananda Thakura is also known as Vamsivadana, Vamsi dasa,
Vamsi. Within Kuliya are the villages known as Teghari, Venciada, Vedadapada,
and Cinedanga Grama. Srikara Cattyopadhyaya's sons moved to Bilvagrama,
Paduli Hata, and Venciada in Kuliya. His eldest son was Sri Yudhisthira
Cattyopadhyaya. His three sons were Madhava dasa, Haridasa, and Krsnadasa.
When Caitanya Mahaprabhu left Jagannatha Puri and came to Bengal to visit the
Ganges and his mother after five years of his sannyasa, he stayed for seven days at
the house of Madhava dasa. It was there that the Lord instructed and delivered
Devananda Pandita as well as many others, when he granted general amnesty to all
those who had committed offenses during the Lord's early life in Nabadwipa
dhama.
It was in the house of Sri Madhava dasa that Vamsivadananda Thakura
took birth. His mother's name was Srimati Candrakaladevi. Vamsivadananda
Thakura is the avatara of Krsna's flute. The day that he took birth, Caitanya

[p.382]
Mahaprabhu was staying in the house of Sri Madhava dasa. Advaita acarya
Prabhu was also present. Madhava dasa was a greatly devoted soul and was very
attached to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. The Lord was very affectionate towards his
son, Vamsi. The Caitanya-Caritamrta makes no mention of Vamsivadananda
Thakura. However in the Caitanya Candrodaya of Kavi Karnapura it is written
(9.33): “When the Lord went to Nabadwipa dhama after crossing the Ganges, he
stayed for seven days in Kuliya-grama at the house of Madhava dasa.”
Mahaprabhu had been in Santipura at the house of Advaita acarya. He crossed the
Ganges and came to Kuliya-grama, where he stayed for seven days in order to
give mercy to the people of Nabadwipa. Sri Narahari Cakravarti Thakura writes in
his Bhakti-ratnakara (4.23) that when Srinivasa acarya went to visit the birthplace
of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu in Mayapura during his pilgrimage to Nabadwipa, he
met Vamsivadananda Thakura. At that time Vamsivadananda Thakura bestowed
his blessings upon the young Srinivasa acarya who also managed to take darsana
of the holy feet of Sri Visnupriya devi. Narahari writes, “Vamsivadananda
Thakura sat the young Srinivasa acarya upon his lap and wet his head with tears
of ecstasy in love of Godhead.”
After the disappearance of Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Vamsivadananda
Thakura was engaged as a servant by Visnupriya devi. It is said that he became the
foremost recipient of her mercy. After the disappearance of Visnupriya devi he
took the Mahaprabhu deity established by her to Koladwipa which is presently the
town known as Nabadwipa dhama. There he established the worship of the
Mahaprabhu deity. There, he also established a deity of Krsna known as

[p.383]
Pranavallabha. In the summer he used to stay in Bilvagrama. There in Bilvagrama
he was famous among the learned scholars, Bhattacaryas, and pious gentlemen.
He had two sons named Caitanya dasa and Nitai dasa. Caitanya dasa also had two
sons: Sri Ramacandra and Sri Sacinandana. In the Gaudiya published by the
Gaudiya Math (Vol. 22 # 30-37) it is written, “Sri Jahnava Mata accepted alms
from this Ramacandra and initiated him in the place called Khadadaha after
instructing him in the science of Vaisnavism.” Sri Ramacandra Goswami was a
bramacari. He engaged his younger brother Sri Sacinandana in the service of
Rama and Krsna in the place called Baghana Pada. Sri Sacinandana Goswami's
sons and descendants are the present day Goswami caste in Baghana Pada.
Vamsivadananda Thakura was a lyrical poet and a composer of songs. All
his songs are especially sweet and mellow and express deep moods of devotion. In
one famous song he has expressed the separation felt by Mother Saci upon the
sannyasa of Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Vamsivadananda Thakura has also composed
songs about Krsna's dana-lila, nauka-vilasa, and vana-vihara-lila.

Lives of the Saints
Vasudeva Ghosh, Govinda Ghosh, and Madhava Ghosh

Krsna dasa Kaviraja Goswami writes (CC Adi 10.115): “The three
brothers, Govinda, Madhava, and Vasudeva were the eighty-second, eighty-third,

[p.384]
and eighty-fourth branches of the Caitanya tree. Lord Caitanya and Nityananda
used to dance in their kirtana performances. In his Caitanya-Caritamrta
commentary, Sripad Bhaktivedanta Swami Maharaja writes: ”The three brothers,
Govinda, Madhava and Vasudeva Ghosh all belonged to a kayastha family.
govinda established the Goinatha temple in Agradvipa, where he resided.
Madhava Ghosh was expert in performing kirtana. No one within this world could
compete with him. He was known as the singer of Vrndavana and was very dear to
Nityananda Prabhu. It is said that when the three borthers performed sankirtana
immediately Lord Caitanya and Nityananda Prabhu would dance in ecstasy.
According to the gaura-ganoddessa-dipika (188), the three brothers were formely
Kalavati, Rasollasa and Gunatunga, who recited the songs composed by Sri
Visakha-gopi. The three brothers were among one of the seven parties that
performed kirtana when Lord Caitanya Mahaprabhu attended the Rathayatra
festival at Jagannatha Puri. Vakresvara Pandita was the chief dancer in their party.
This is vividly described in the Madhya-lila,Chapter Thirteen, verses 42 and 43 [of
Caitanya-Caritamrta]”
Kaviraja Goswami further records (CC adi 10.117—118): “By the order of
Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, three devotees accompanied Lord Nityananda Prabhu
when He returned to Bengal to preach. These three were Ramadasa, Madhava, and
Vasudeva Ghosh. Govinda Ghosh, however, remained with Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu and thus felt great satisfaction.”
The sankirtana party comprising these three brothers and their performance
of kirtana at the Ratha-yatra festival in Jagannatha Puri is is described as follows

[p.385]
(CC adi 13.24—63): “Everyone was astonished to see the decorations on the
Ratha car. The car appeared to be newly made of gold, and it was as high as
Mount Sumeru. the decorations included bright mirrors, and hundreds and
hundreds of camaras [white whisks made of yak tails]. On top of the car were a
neat and clean canopy and very beautiful flag. The car was also decorated with
silken cloth and various pictures. Many brass bells, gongs, and ankle bells rang.
For the pastimes of the Ratha-yatra ceremony, Lord Jagannatha got aboard one
car, and His sister, Subhadra, and elder brother Balarama, got aboard two other
cars. For fifteen days Lord Jagannatha had remained in a secluded place with the
supreme goddess of fortune and had performed his pastimes with her. Having
taken permission from the goddess of fortune, the Lord came out to ride on the
Ratha car and perform His pastiems for the pleasure of the devotees....As the car
stood still, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu gathered all his devotees and with His own
hand, decorated them with flower garlands and sandalwood pulp. Paramananda
Prui and Brahmananda Bharati were both personally given garlands and
sandalwood pulp from the very hands od Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. This increased
their transcendental pleasure. Similarly, when Advaita acarya and Nityananda
Prabhu felt the touch of the transcendental hand of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, they
were both very pleased. The Lord also gave garlands and sandalwood pulp to the
performers of sankirtana. The chief performers were Svarupa Damodra and
Srivasa Thakura. There were altogether four parties of kirtana performers,
comprising twenty-four chanters. In each party there were also two mrdanga
players, making an additional eight person. When the four parties were formed, Sri

[p.386]
Caitanya Mahaprabhu, after some consideration, divided the chanters. Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu ordered Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita acarya, Haridasa Thakura and
Vakresvara Pandita to dance in each of the four respective parties. [Aside from the
other three...] The Lord formed another group, appointing Govinda Ghosh as the
lead singer. In this group Chota Haridasa, Visnudasa, and Raghava Pandita sang
in response to Govinda Ghosh. The two brothers of Govinda Ghosh, Madhava
Ghosh and Vasudeva Ghosh also joined the group as responsive singers. In that
kirtana group, Vakresvara Pandita was the dancer...Lord Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
performed his pastimes for some time in this way. He personally sang and induced
his personal associates to dance.”
According to the Gaura-Parsada-caritavali the three brothers, Vasudeva
Ghosh, Madhava Ghosh and Govinda Ghosh were especially sweet-throated
singers. When these three would sing, Nityananda Prabhu Himself would dance in
great ecstasy.
It is said that their home village was within Sri Hatta in a place called
either Baduna or Burangi grama. In any case it is known that Vasudeva Ghosh
Thakura's father resided in Kumara hatta. After the passing away of their father,
Vasudeva, Govinda, and Madhava Ghosh went to live in Nabadwipa dhama. They
came from the kayastha caste that has its origin in the Northern part of the Radadesa, where the Ganges does not flow. All three of them are eternal associates of
Sri Caitanya and Nityananda. According to Srila Bhaktisiddhanta Saraswati
Prabhupada these three are situated in the madhurya-rasa and are in the section of
those who have accepted Sri Radhika as their ultimate asraya-vigraha.

[p.387]
Vasughosh Thakura has written many songs about Sri Gauranga. One of
his most famous songs contains the line yadi gaura na ha'te tabe ke haita kemane
dharitam de. Sripada Bhakti Raksaka Sridhar deva Goswami has commented on
this song as follows: “Vasudev Ghosh says, yadi gaura na ha'te tabe ke haita
kemane dharitam de: ‘If Gauranga had not appeared in this Kali-yuga, then how
could we tolerate living? How could we sustain our lives? What he has given—the
very gist, the very charm of life—without that, we think it is impossible for
anyone to live in this world. Such a thing has been invented, discovered by
Gauranga. If He had not come, then how could we live. It is impossible to live
devoid of such a holy and gracious thing as divine love. Without Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, how could we know that Radharani stands supreme in the world of
divine love? We have received all these things from Him, and now we think that
life is worth living. Otherwise, to live would be suicidal.”
Vasudeva Ghosh has written many other songs about Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu. In another song, he describes the childhood play of the Lord in a
song beginning with the line “sacira anginaya nace visvambhara raya:
In Sacidevi's courtyard dances Visvambhara Roy—
The master of the universe—a little golden boy.
Round and round he runs and plays, at last he runs and hides.
“You can't find me,” he laughs, “O Ma! You can't find me,” he chides.
“O Visvambhara,” his mother cries, “I can't see you, my boy.”
He runs to her, he holds her sari's hem, and leaps with joy.
His merry dance of glee would put the wag-tail bird to shame;

[p.388]
Thus sings the poet Vasudev of Sri Caitanya's fame:
The beauty of his childish form is radiant and fair
enrapturing the minds and hearts of all souls everywhere.”
Vasudeva Ghosh has written another song where he asserts that Sri
Caitanya is one and the same with Rama and Krsna and Lord Jagannatha: “jaya
jaya jagannatha sacira nandana...”
“All glories to the Lord of the Universe, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, who is one and
the same with Lord Jagannatha. All glories to Lord Jagannatha. The three worlds
fall before his feet. On the altar in the temple at Jagannatha Puri Lord Krsna holds
the conch, cakra, mace, and lotus; but when he comes from Nabadwipa-dhama
that same Lord carries the danda and kamandalu, the staff and waterpot of a
sannyasi, a renounced mendicant. It is said that the same Rama who previously
chastised the demon king Ravana is a vaibhava expansion of His, who descended
in order to manifest different pastimes. The Gaura-avatara descends from Goloka
with the mood of Srimati Radharani. In this avatara the Lord preaches the glories
of the holy name of Krsna in the form of the Hare Krsna maha-mantra. Vasudeva
Ghosh, with folded hands, chants the glories of that Supreme Lord Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, who is Krsna Himself, Lord Jagannatha, the master of the universe.
Vasudeva Ghosh thus glorifies all three of those Lords. What do I need to speak of
all of your hundreds and hundreds of avataras, when O Lord Gauranga, you alone
are the topmost. All the Visnu avataras as well as Lord Siva, Sukadeva Goswami,
Narada Muni, the four Kumaras, and all the masters of the universe are begging
for the divine love which you alone can distribute. You were famous in your

[p.389]
former lila as Lord Rama for constructing a floating bridge of stones across the
Indian Ocean to Sri Lanka. Now in this Kali-yuga, you have given us the bridge of
kirtana, by which even the lame and blind can cross over the ocean of material
existence and attain supreme spiritual happiness. Without any qualification for
receiving this mercy all men and women can dance in ecstasy and attain perfection
by the mercy of Sri Gauranga. As a result of his divine qualities, the ten directions
become mad with ecstasy. Therefore, Vasudeva Ghosh says, ‘Give up all your
interest in japa, austerity, and Vedic understanding and just accept my Sri
Gauranga as your life and soul.’”
According to the Gaura-ganoddesa-dipika, Govinda Ghosh, Madhava
Ghosh, and Vasudeva Ghosh Thakura were formerly the gopis in Vrndavana
named Kalavati, Rasolasa and Gunatunga Sakhi. When Mahaprabhu was staying
in Jagannatha Puri, these three brothers would come every year for the Ratha-yatra
and perform their famous kirtana. After the passing of Mahaprabhu from this
world into the spiritual world, these three brothers went their separate ways.
Govinda Ghosh Thakura went to live in Agradwipa, Sri Madhava Ghosh Thakura
went to live in Danihatta, and Sri Vasudeva Ghosh went to live in the village of
Tamala.
It is said that Govinda Ghosh Thakura had no children. As he grew old, he
was in some anxiety, worrying about who would perform his funeral ceremony
and offer a sacrifice in his honor after his passing away. One night in a dream
Gopinatha, his Krsna Deity, came to him and said, “Do not worry, I shall perform
the sacrificial offerings myself. Have no fear.” Even to this day, every year on the

[p.390]
anniversary of the passing away of Sri Govinda Ghosh Thakura, the Gopinatha
Deity performs the sacrificial ceremonies in his honor. Sri Vasudeva Ghosh
Thakura passed away on the second day of the full moon in the month of Kartika.

Lives of the Saints
Vishnupriya devi

The Supreme Lord Visnu has three different Saktis: Sri, Bhu, and Nila. Sri
Visnupriya is the internal potency known as Bhu-sakti. She appeared in Gaura-lila
to assist Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu with his mission of spreading the holy name of
Krsna.
In Nabadwipa-dhama there lived a brahmana named Sanatana Misra, who
was an extremely exalted Visnu-bhakta. He was a pious and generous brahmana as
well, and used to feed, clothe and shelter many people. He was famous as the king
of panditas. In fact, in Dvapara-yuga, he had been a king named Satrajit. As a
result of his pure devotion to Visnu he was blessed with a beautiful daughter who
was rich in all good qualities. From her early childhood, Visnupriya devi used to
bathe in the Ganges three times daily. She was devoted to her parents and
carefully followed the scriptural principles, and performed puja, arcana, and
served the tulasi tree, while observing many different vows of austerity and piety.
Every day, when Visnupriya went to visit the Ganges, she would bow at
the feet of Mother Saci with great humility. When Sacidevi noticed the modest

[p.391]
and beautiful Visnupriya-devi she gave Visnupriya-devi her blessing that she
might find a good husband, saying, “May Krsna bestow upon you a good
husband.” Fom that moment, she began thinking of how Visnupriya would make
a good bride for her son Nimai. Upon further inquiry she found that the girl's name
was Visnupriya, that she was the daughter of Sanatana Misra, a wealthy and
respect pandita of Nabadwipa.
At this time, the Lord's first wife, Laksmipriya had passed away and
entered into the spiritual domain. Saci's heart had been tormented with great pain
at first, but as the days passed, she had become anxious for her son's happiness. In
this way she began to think of quickly arranging for a new bride for her son.
When she found that Sri Gaurasundra had no objections to the idea, Sacidevi
began to make arrangements in earnest. She sent a servant to the house of
Kasinatha Pandita, the matchmaker to arrange an appointment. When she met
with Kasinatha Pandita, she proposed that a match be made between Nimai
Pandita and Visnupriya-devi, saying, “Speak to the Raja-pandita; If he so desries
he may bestow his daughter's hand in marriage upon my son Nimai.” When the
matchmaker heard of these plans, he was overjoyed and was eager to conclude the
arrangements quickly. He set out immediately for the house of Sanatana Misra,
chanting the holy name of Hari in jubilation.
According to caste, Sanatana Misra was situated in a higher social position,
and so might not agree to the wedding. Saci was concerned that Sanatana Misra,
who was higher in social position would refuse to marry his daughter to Nimai
Pandita, the son of poor parents, and who had a reputation as an eccentric.

[p.392]
When Sacimata submitted the proposal to the matchmaker, he was highly
pleased. When she told him she was worried whether or not Sanatana Misra would
accept the idea, she said, “Thakurani! If Sanatana Misra wouldn't give his
daughter's hand in marriage to Nimai Pandita, whom would he have her marry?”
Meanwhile, Sanatana Misra had always hoped that Visnupriya would be
wed to Nimai Pandita. In fact, for a long time Sanatana Misra himself had been
considering just such a match. As he had seen his daughter approaching
marriageable age, he had begun keeping his eye our for a boy who would make
her a suitable husband. After surveying the field, he concluded that the best
possible husband for her would be Nimai Pandita. He was the only choice of
Sanatana Misra, who found that in personal beauty and in good qualities Nimai
Pandita had no equal. His age was also just right. He thought that if such a perfect
match could take place, he would be extremely fortunate. He prayed to Hari, “O
Lord! If I have any pious credits as a result of my previous births, let my daughter
and Nimai Pandita be married.”
One day, just as the brahmana and his wife were confidentially discussing
the possibility of arranging their daughter's wedding, Kasinatha Pandita, the
matchmaker sent by Sacidevi, arrived. Sanatana Misra offered him a respectful
seat and a glass of sweet water. Sanatana Misra thought within himself that the
appearance of the famous matchmaker Kasinatha Misra must bode well for him.
He began to think that perhaps his prays had been answered. He said, “Pandita!
What news?” Kasinatha Pandita smiled and explained to him all about Sacimata's
plans for the marriage of Nimai Pandita and Visnupriya-devi.

[p.393]
This is recorded in the Caitanya-Bhagavata as follows: Kasinatha Pandita
said, “You should give your daughter in marriage to Visvambhara Pandita, and
thus arrange a wedding between the divine Lord and your daughter, the highly
chaste and gentle Visnupriya-devi. Visnupriya and Nimai Pandita would make a
perfect match. It would be a marriage made in heaven, just as the wedding of
Rumkini-devi and Sri Krsna.”
Hearing the news of Kasinatha Pandita, Sanatana Misra and his wife felt as
if their souls had been stolen by happiness. The Supreme Lord, acting as the
Supersoul within, knew their heartfelt desires to marry their daughter to Nimai
Pandita and satisfied their desire.
Sanatana Misra said, “O Kasinatha Pandita Prabhu, how is it that you come
to suggest such a thing?” Then Kasinatha Pandita explained everything about
Sacidevi's proposals for the wedding and told him that marrying his daughter to
Nimai Pandita would be the cause of supreme good fortune, both for his daughter
and for his family. Sanatana Misra was overjoyed, and discussed everything with
relatives and friends for their approval. As all of them said, “This wedding should
be performed immediately.” eagerly set about making all the necessary
arrangements with the matchmaker Kasinatha Pandita, saying, ““By all means, I
shall give my daughter's hand in marriage to Nimai Pandita. This will certainly
enhance the good fortune of my entire family. Go to them and give them my
assurances. You have my word.”
In this way, Kasinatha Pandita, having set everything right with Sanatana
Misra, retruned to the house of with great satisfaction Sacidevi and told her

[p.394]
everything about their meeting. After hearing all this, Sacidevi said, “Now I have
done everything that I can. The rest is up to Sri Hari; now everything is in the
hands of Providence.”
Nimai himself, up to this point knew nothing of all this; but after
everything was set, his mother informed him of the arrangements she had made
and Nimai gave his consent to the marriage. When the people of Nabadwipa
heard that Nimai Pandita was soon to be married they were filled with joy.
Different friends of the family and students of Nimai Pandita wanted to
step forward and offer something charity so that the wedding would be a success,
but a rich landowner named Bhuddhimanta Khan proclaimed, “I myself will bear
the entire cost of the wedding!” Mukunda Sanjaya, in whose worship hall Nimai
Pandita conducted his school said, “Listen, friend and brother: why should you
bear all the expense? Let us share some of the cost with you. We all wish to ensure
the success of this event.” But Buddhimanta Khan refused saying, “Listen my
brother: this wedding is not to be performed in the style of poor brahmanas, but in
a manner entirely fit for a prince. This is not a time for brahminical austerity.”
Nimai Pandita's students also took the matter seriously and helped to see to it that
the wedding was a grand one, with great pomp and circumstance.
Thereafter an auspicious day was selected, and at an auspicious time, the
preliminary ceremonies began. The whole of Nabadwipa turned out for the
wedding of Sri Nimai Pandita and Srimati Visnupriya-devi. Immense canopies
were set up, and an enclosure was made with rows of plaintain trees. Sri Nimai
Pandita and his new bride looked beautiful together, dressed in fine garments.

[p.395]
Decorated with all the traditional wedding ornaments, the two of them shone
together on the raised wedding platform as radiantly as the spotless harvest moon.
The temple was also finely decorated: the earth was sprinkled with colored rice
powder in paintings of auspicious symbols, and fresh green plaintain leaves
created a festive atmosphere. The temple was also decorated with waterpots filled
with fresh water, as well as mango leaves, lighted ghee lamps, new rice paddy, as
well as pots filled with yogurt, and many other auspicious things.
Not only did the whole of Nabadwipa turn out for the wedding, but people
came from all the neighboring villages from miles around to see the wonderful
event. Everyone was invited. The poets came and sang the songs they had
composed in honour of the happy couple. Many friends and well-wishers came to
congratulate Sacidevi and express their best wishes for the nuptial bliss of Sri
Nimai and Visnupriya-devi. As noon approached, musicians began playing their
instruments—mrdanga, sanai, big drums, cymbals, all arose together in song to
create a beautiful sound. The professional poets chanted verses of praise, and
everything was auspicious. Then Lord Visnu was worshiped, bhoga was offered to
the Deities and arotika was performed, and the auspcious wedding ceremony was
performed.
As the wedding took place, everyone's eyes were upon Nimai and
Visnupriya as if to devour the beauty of the divine couple. The ladies present
there all adored Nimai, but so pure were their hearts upon seeing the holy
spectacle that none of them felt the least bit of envy or jealously at Visnupriyadevi's good fortune. Within the inner parts of the house reserved for the ladies, the

[p.396]
sounds of jubilation were uproarious. Some of them sounded the call of the
peacocks as is traditionally done by Hindu ladies on festive occasions, while
others blew on conches to celebrate.
All the Vaisnavas present chanted the glories of Hari. And brahmanas
chanted the Vedas, as the jewel of the twiceborn took his seat in their midst. The
brahmanas surrounded him on all sides with great enthusiasm. At the wedding of
the Lord the four directions were inundated by a sea of joy; those who did not
drown in that sea of joy simply floated in bliss.
The ceremonial offerings of sweet water and betel nut to the new bride and
groom were made. And one by one all the devotees and brahmanas stepped
forward had their brows daubed with sandalwood pulp by the Lord, placed
fragrant garlands of exotic flowers around their necks and gave them boxes of
betel nuts. It was impossible to count all the brahmanas who had gathered there.
Among them, some were greedy, and after standing in line once for garlands and
betel-nut, they would again get in line, repeatedly receiving gifts of sandalwood,
garlands, and betel. Everyone was lost in a sea of joy, and did not notice this, as
Gauranga Himself ordered that gifts be given three times over for everyone. The
stock of garlands, sandalwood paste, and betel turned out to be endless; this was a
great miracle that no one could understand. What to speak of what the people
gathered there actually received, what was disgarded and left on the ground was
enough for five weddings. Everyone cheerfully made their offerings of auspicious
gifts to the Lord and Visnupriya-devi. And in this way, all of Nadia was drowned
in the ocean of bliss.

[p.397]
Everyone said, “This purificatory ceremony is praiseworthy beyond belief:
we have seen great wealth in Nabadwipa before, but such a celebration on the eve
of a wedding has never taken place. No one has ever given such charity to the
brahmanas with such an open hand. Sanatana Misra, the Raja-pandita, filled with
delight, arrived with all manner of auspicious articles just suitable for the
occasion, accompanied with friends, relatives, and brahmanas amdist a joyous
display of dance, song, and musical performances. With a cheerful mind, he then
performed the ceremony of anointing the Lord with perfume, and then the crowd
began a triumphal chant in praise of the holy name of Hari.
Sri Gaurasundara performed the customary cermonies, worshiping Visnu
and the ancestors amid a happy atmosphere of song and dance. Earthen vessels
filled with water, unhusked rice, curd, lamps, and mango twigs decorated the hall
and the courtyard as the banners waved. With all these decorations, an auspicious
atmosphere was created. Then Sacidevi in the compnay of the local ladies began to
perform the customary rites, worshiping the Ganges and the goddess Sasthi.
Finally she returned home and loaded the local ladies down with charity: she made
gifts of rice, plaintains, ghee, betel, and vermillion. By the Lord's mystic power,
she was able to give all these things in abundance beyond belief. All the women
were drowned in ghee, rice, and vermillion beyond measure and everyone's desires
were thus fulfilled and their minds pacified.
The mother of Visnupriya-devi also rejoiced with the local ladies, and the
pious Sanatana Misra himself swam in the ocean of ecstatic delighht. Sri
Gaurasundara meanwhile, had finished performing all the duties enjoined by the

[p.398]
sastras, and sat smiling in a leisurely fashion for some time.
Thereafter, Sri Gaurasundara satisfied the brahmanas by distributing great
wealth in charity. He humbly gave them nice foodstuffs and fine cloth in charity,
honoring everyone according to his status with appropriate gifts, respects, and
affection. After all this, the brahmanas returned to their homes for their afternoon
meals. Having already performed his ceremonial duties, Sanatana Misra had
returned home to prepare for the Lord's arrival.
As the afternoon wore on, the Lord's devotees and well-wishers took great
pleasure in decorating the person of the Lord. They anointed his body with
sandalwood paste and perfumed oils. Upon his forehead they painted a crescent
moon with sandalwood paste. Then they crowned his forehead with a tiara and
covered his body with garlands. After giving him beautiful garments to wear, they
applied collyrium to his lotus eyes. Then they tied unhusked rice, kusa grass and
fine thread to his arm and placed in His lotus hand a fresh plaintain leaf and a
mirror. His ears were ornamented with golden earrings and his forearms and
biceps with bangles and gold chains. And as they decorated the Lord's body, his
devotees were enchanted and entranced.
As the sun began to set, everyone said, “Let us now perform the auspicious
ceremony of starting for the house of the bride. After circumambulating
Nabadwipa, Nimai Pandita will arrive near the bride's house at the end of twilight.
At that time, Buddhimanta Khana, having prepared the palanquin, had it brought
there. A loud vibration of chanting and songs arose, as the brahmanas chanted
hymns from the Vedas and the poets again sang their verses. Sri Gaurasundara,

[p.399]
after receiving all the wedding gifts offered to the bride and groom, offered his
humble respects to his mother, the brahmanas, and his guru, bowing down before
their feet. After this Gaurasundara was carried upon a palanquin to the banks of
the Ganges amidst cries of jubilation. After bathing in the Ganges and offering
respects to Gangadevi, he again sat upon the wedding palanquin as the poets sang
auspicious prayers that resounded throughout the four directions with the glories
of the Lord as the festival procession began.
The parade itself is wonderful to recall: thousands of torches were lit and
various musical instruments created a sweet vibration as the singers sang and
dancers danced. Behind the palanquin marched the foot-soldiers of Buddhimanta
Khan and all his servants and bearers in parallel lines. Behind them marched the
flag-bearers who held various multi-colored banners of wondrous designs and
emblems. After the flag-bearers were the clowns and tumblers, magicians and
dancing actors, entertaining the crowd. All kinds of musicians followed the
procession with their various instruments: victory drums, war drums, wedding
drums, mrdangas, kholas, patasas, conches, flutes made of reeds, cymbals,
varanga, horns, all produced a great concert. Hundreds of thousands of children
danced in that procession as Sri Gaurasundara smiled. Not only children behaved
like children, but the old and wise also threw off their inhibitions and danced like
jubilant peacocks.
They all halted on the banks of the Ganges for some time, where there was
a wonderful concert of music, song, and dance. At last, after bowing to the
Ganges and circumambulating the whole of Nabvadwipa, the wedding procession

[p.400]
of Nimai Pandita arrived at the home of Sanatana Misra, where Visnupriya-devi
waited eagerly to meet her new husband.
In this way, as the sun set over Nabadwipa dhama, Nimai Pandita arrived
at the house of his waiting bride accompanied by music, torches and fireworks
and followed by a garish parade and a huge crowd. On beholding the vast and
superhuman procession, the people gathered there were awed. “Such opulence
surpasses that of even the King of Heavan or the Lord of Vaikuntha,” they said,
“Never before have we seen such pomp and circumstance,” they said. “What
opulence!” Those unlucky brahmanas who failed to marry their own daughters to
Nimai Pandita all though to themselves that they had missed an opportunity that
only passes once in many lifetimes.
Upon reaching the house of Sanatana Misra, there was an uproar of
triumphal shouts of joy. The musicians, competing to defeat each other in
dexterity and tempo, began playing faster and faster and the crowd became
excited. The Raja-pandita, Sri Sanatana Misra came forward to greet the Lord and
helping him down from the palanquin, he took him by the hand, led him to the seat
of honor within the wedding hall and made him sit. He had made many grand
arrangements to accommodate the bride and groom and was overjoyed to see
Nimai Pandita's arrival at his home. After seating the Lord, he too took his seat, so
that he could perform the reception ceremonies. Sanatana Misra then offered the
Lord water for washing his feet, and a fragrant mouthwash for rinsing his mouth.
He also offered the Lord fine garments and ornaments, thus welcoming the Lord to
his family and home.

[p.401]
After this, Sanatana Misra's wife, in the company of the ladies present
there did her part in the ceremony. She placed a finely woven wreath of fresh rice
stalks and blades of kusa straw upon the Lord's beautiful head and after
performing the arotika ceremony and waving the lamp of seven wicks, she chanted
various hymns, threw rice, and blew the conch. After all the customary rituals had
been thus performed, they carried Sri Visnupriya-devi, Laksmi herself, into the
wedding arena on a palanquin.
It is said that Nimai Pandita, royally dressed in the finery of his wedding
garments put cupid himself to shame. When the Supreme Goddess of Fortune,
Visnupriya appeared before the assembled devotees, brahmanas, and guests
garbed in silk and richly adorned with jewels, she looked just like an angel from
heaven.
With her radiance dazzling the eyes of all present, she performed the
traditional circumambulation of the groom, walking in seven circles around Sri
Nimai Pandita, before offering herself at his feet by bowing down. According to
tradition they were required to exchange their first glances with one another at that
time, but due to her natural shyness, Visnupriya-devi was unable to look upon the
Lord's holy face. But according to the customs of Hindu marriage this ceremony
had to be performed. A screen was therefore placed around the bride and groom,
that they might privately exchange their first glance at one another. At first glance
they re-established their eternal relationship, for just as Laksmi and Narayana are
eternally inseparable, Sri Visnupriya-devi and Sri Gaurasundara are eternally
related to one another as consorts.

[p.402]
At last the Supreme Laksmi, Visnupriya-devi exchanged garlands with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Gaura-Narayana, and at that time the crowd let
out a tumultuous roar of jubilation. Visnupriya-devi first offered the garlands at
the holy feet of the Lord, thus surrendering herself. After this, Lord Gaurasundara
picked up the garlands and placed them around Visnupriya's neck. At this time,
Laksmi and Narayana, (Visnupriya-devi and Sri Gauranga) began throwing
flowers at each other with great delight, while from above, in the heavens, all the
gods headed by Brahma invisibly showered flowers upon the divine couple.
At that time, various mock quarrels broke out between the families of the
two parties as everyone laughed and joked with one another. The Lord smiled,
and his smile brought bliss to the hearts of all who were assembled there. As
thousands of torches burned brightly, the crowd became ecstatic. Their cries of joy
filled the four directions with a pleasing vibration as the bride and groom beheld
each other for the first time.
Then Sanatana Misra with joyful heart sat down to officially give his
daughter away to Nimai Pandita. Having washed his feet and rinsed his mouth, he
performed the ceremony of bestowing his daughter's hand upon the Lord. At that
time he gave the Lord as a dowry many cows, lands, and servants. After this the
final fire sacrifice was performed, and having finished all the scriptural procedures
and having observed all the rituals, ceremonies and customs of a proper Hindu
wedding, they led the bride and groom into their new quarters within the palatial
home of the Raja-pandita, Sanatana Misra. And as the two of them resided there,
the house of Sanatana Misra was transformed into Vaikuntha.

[p.403]
Who can describe the ecstasy tasted by Sanatana Misra and his family
upon the wedding of their beloved Visnupriya-devi to Nimai Pandita? The same
good fortune that was bestowed upon Janaka Maharaja when his daughter Sita was
married to Rama, the same good fortune that was showered upon Bhishmaka when
his daughter Rukmini was married to Sri Krsna was now being rained upon Sri
Sanatana Misra along with his family.
On the following day, Sri Gauracandra, the essence of all the worlds,
performing the remaining customary rites. That afternoon it was time for
Gauracandra and his new bride to return to their home. Amid joyous song, music
and dance, and the benedictions of the brahmanas and poets gathered there, Sri
Gaurasundara and Visnupriya-devi, bowed to the assembled exalted personalities,
and ascended the finely decorated palanquin. Everyone cheered them on with
shouts of victory as the divine couple were carried in procession on the palanquin
to their new home. Everyone who saw them praised Nimai and Visnupriya. Some
of the ladies said, “This girl is supremely fortunate. She must have served Kamala
and Parvati in her previous lives to have wed such a husband.“ Others said, “They
must be Kamala and Sri Hari themselves.” Others said, “They must certainly be
Rati and Kamadeva themselves, the god and goddess of love.” At this point in
Caitanya-Bhagavata, Vrndavana dasa Thakura remarks, “Who can estimate the
good fortune of the residents of Nabadwipa who were able to behold the wedding
of Sri Gaurasundara and Visnupriya-devi?”
The wedding procession continued in this way, surrounded by jubilation,
song, dance, showers of flowers and the vibration of various musical instruments

[p.404]
including the mrdanga, shenai, kartals, baranga, and dhak. Finally the divine
couple arrived at their new home. At that time, mother Saci and those ladies who
were close friends of the family welcomed Sri Visnupriya devi into the home as
her new daughter. As Visnupriya-devi and Sri Gaurasundara (Laksmi and
Narayana) entered their home and took their seats, shouts of jubilation filled the
entire universe.
After this, the Lord gave charity to all, satisfying them according to their
station. To the poets he offered sweet words; to the dancers fine clothes, and to the
beggars he gave money. In this way he gave something to everyone and satisfied
all the friends and relatives by his lavish charity. Upon Buddhimanta Khan, who
had borne the majority of the wedding expense, he bestowed his embrace. No one
can describe the joy of Buddhimanta Khan upon being embraced by the Lord. In
this way, Vrndavana dasa Thakura describes the wedding of Visnupriya-devi and
Gaurasundara. Whoever hears the description of the Lord's wedding festival with
faith and love will attain the mercy of Sri Gauranga.
After describing Visnupriya-devi's wedding with Sri Gaurasundara,
Vrndavana dasa Thakura does not give any further elaborate description of her
pastimes, except to mention that when Gauranga returned from Gaya after having
been initiated by ^svara Puri she was greatly relieved and felt as if her life had
returned. Vrndavana dasa does not describe the separation she felt at the sannyasa
of the Lord, as it is a painful subject. This is, however, discussed by Locan dasa
Thakura, and this description may be found in the chapter on his life. After the
disappearance of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, When Srinivasa acarya made his

[p.405]
pilgrimage to Navadwipa dhama he was fortunate enough to meet Sri Visnupriyadevi when she was approaching old age. The description of their meeting may be
found in the chapter on Srinivasa acarya.

Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura
Shrila Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura took birth in the year 1586 Shaka
era within the Nadia district of West Bengal in a place called Prasiddha Deva
Gram. He appeared in the Radhiya line of brahamanas. He had two brothers: Shri
Ramabhadra Chakravarti and Shri Raghunatha Chakravarti. Shrila Chakravarti
Thakura went on to live in the Murshidabad district of West Bengal, in
Saiyadabad, where he received mantra initiation from Shri Krishna Charana
Chakravarti. He lived for a long time in the house of his gurudeva, where he wrote
many books. Because Chakravarti Thakura lived for so long in Saiyadabad, he
became known as a resident of Saiyadabad. In one of the final verses of his
commentary on the Alankara Kaustubha, he himself has written:
saiyadabadanivasi shri vishvanatha sharmana, chakravartiti namneyam krita tika
subodhini. "Shri Vishvanataha Cakravarti, a brahmana residing in Saiyadabad, has
composed this commentary on the Alankara Kaustubha." When Shrila
Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura lived in Nadiya, he closely studied the
scriptures, beginning with a study of Sanskrit grammar, poetry, and rhetoric. It is
said that even as a boy in school, he was an undefeatable scholar who could
overcome anyone in argument and debate. From an early age, he was indifferent
towards family life. For the purpose of binding his son in the contract of family
life, Vishvanatha's father arranged for his marriage when he was very young. He
remained a married man for only a short time. Soon he renounced his wife and
home and went to live in Vrindavan. After this, his parents and relatives made
many unsuccessful attempts to induce him to return to family life, but
Vishvanatha Chakravarti was fixed in his determination to renounce wordly life
and surrender himself completely to the service of Krishna.
After having come to Vrindavan Dhama, Shri Vishvanatha took up his

[p.406]
residence in the bhajan kutir of Shri Krishna Das Kaviraja Goswami on the banks
of the Radha-kunda, where there lived a disciple of Krishna das Kaviraja whose
name was Mukunda das. There, Shri Vishvanatha Cakravarti made a careful study
of the Goswami's literatures. In that holy place he later wrote many commentaries
on the books of the Goswamis.
Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura established the worship of the deity
of Shri Gokulananda. Vishvanath Chakravarti Thakur was also sometimes known
as Harivallabha das. Vishvanatha's title, "Chakravarti" was awarded to him by the
devotees. Generally this title designates one who maintains (varti) a circle (chakra)
of influence. Hence chakravarti usually means "emperor," for the emperor's
maintains his power over a vast circle. A more devotional explanation of this title
is found in the introduction to Vishvanatha's Svapna-Vilasamrita. There is has
been written vishvasya natharupausau, bhaktiratna pradarshanat, bhakta chakre
vartitatva, chakravartamaya bhavat. "He who reveals the jewel of devotion to
Vishvanatha, the Lord of the Universe, and thus expands the circle of bhakti is
a"Cakravarti."
Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura has written many books, among
which are the following:
Commentaries on Srimad-Bhagavatam (Sararthadarshini-tika), Bhagavadgita (Sararthavarshini-tika), Alankara Kaustubha (Subodhini-tika); Ujjvalanilamani, Ananda Vrindavana Champu (Sukhavartini-tika); Rupa Goswami's
Vidagdha-Madhava Natakam, Gopal-tapani-upanishad; Chaitanya-charitamrita;
and original works such as Shri Krishna-Bhavanamrita Mahakavya;
Svapnavilasamrita; Madhurya Kadambini; Stavamala-lahari; Aishvarya
Kadambini [Note: this is not the same Aishvarya Kadambini as that of Baladeva
Vidyabhusana. Baladeva Vidyabhusan's book describes the opulences of Shri
Krishna, whereas Vishvanatha's book by the same name deals with the philosophy
of achintya-bhedabheda-vada, Shri Chaitanya's philosophy of inconceivable
oneness and difference].
The diksha-guru-parampara of Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura is

[p.407]
given as follows: Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Lokanatha Goswami, Narottama
Thakura, Ganganarayan Chakravarti, Krishnacharan Chakravarti, Radharaman
Chakravarti, Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura. Shri Krishna Charan Chakravarti
and Radha Ramana Chakravarti both lived in Saiyadabad. Vishvanatha
Chakravarti Thakura studied extensively under them when he was in Saiyadabad
before going to Vrindavan, where he met Mukunda das Goswami, a disciple of
Krishna das Kaviraja Goswami and studied the Goswami literatures.
The siksha-guru-parampara is considered more important than the dikshaguru-parampara,because it follows the descent of revealed truth through its most
significant representatives, as opposed to following a strictly sacerdotal
heirarchy. The siksha-guru-paramapara from Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu to
Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura is, according to Shrila Bhaktisiddhanta
Saraswati Thakura, as follows: Shri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Svarup Damodara,
Rupa Goswami and Sanatana Goswami (along with Raghunatha Das Goswami,
Raghunath Bhatta Goswami, Gopal Bhatta Goswami), Shri Jiva Goswami,
Krishna das Kaviraja Goswami, Narottama Das Thakura (along with
Shyamananda Prabhu and Shrinivasa Acharya), Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura.
Shri Vishvanatha Chakravarti Thakura disappeared on the Vasant
Panchami day in the month of Magh.

[1]

The following verses from ßruti are quoted by VedÅnta DeÍika, the next important acÅrya after
RÅmanuja in his biography called Sac-caritra-rak›a.

[2]

From the ®k-Ba›kala-sakha

[3]

From Atharva-Veda

[4]

From the Vayavya Upa-purÅna, a section of the BrahmaˆÎa-sa˜hita.

[5]

From the Atharva-Veda.

[6]

MuˆÎaka Upani›ad

[7]

ßvetÅÍvatara Upani›ad 6.8

[p.408]
[8]

Taittiriya NÅrÅyaˆopani›ad 93.

[9]

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya 3.52