[p.1]
Folio Archives

Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Carita Mahä-Kävya
The Character of
Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu

* * *
FIRST PRAKRAMA

* * *
First Sarga
saìkñepa-gaura-lélä-vivaraëam
A Summary of Çré Gauräìga's Mission

sa jayati viçuddha-vikramaù / kanakäbhaù kamaläyatekaëaù
vara-jänu-vilambi-ña-bhujo / bahudhä bhakti-rasäbhinartakaù 1
saù - He; jayati - may He be victorious; viçuddha-vikramaù - who has
immaculate and immense potency; kanaka-äbhaù - golden luster; kamala lotus; äyata - spread; ékaëaù - glance; vara-jänu - beautiful knees; vilambi extend; ñaö-bhujaù - six arms; bahudhä - manifold; bhakti-rasa - devotional
mellows; abhinartakaù - enchanting dancer.
May my Lord be ever victorious, whose potencies are immense and immaculate,
whose luster is glittering golden, whose eyes are as wide-spread as the petals of the

[p.2]
lotus, whose beautiful arms extend down to His excellent knees, and who
munificently distributes the myriad mellows of devotion while delightfully dancing.

sa jagannätha-suto jagat-patir / jagad-ädir jagad-ärti-hä vibhuù
kali-pätä kali-bhära-härako / 'jani çacyä nija-bhaktim udvahan 2
sa - He; jagannätha-sutaù - son of Jagannätha Miçra; jagat-patiù - protector of
the cosmos; jagat-ädiù - origin of the cosmos; jagat-ärti-hä - who destroys the
ills of the cosmos; vibhuù - all-pervading and self controlled; kali-pätä protector of the age of Kali; kali-bhära-härakaù - taker of the burden of the age
of quarrel; ajani - takes birth; çacyäm - in the womb of Çacé Devé; nija - own;
bhaktim - devotion; udvahan - bears.
It is that very son of Jagannätha who is the creator and protector of the universes,
and the destroyer of the universal miseries. Being fully sense-controlled and allpervading, He is able to give mankind protection in the age of Kali. Taking birth in
the womb of Çrématé Çacé Devé, He takes away the burden of this age, and brings the
process of pure devotion to Himself.

sa navadvépa-vatéu bhümiu / dvija-varyair abhinandito hariù
nija-pituù sukha-do ghe sukha / nivasan veda-aò-aìga-sahitäm 3
saù - He; navadvépa-vatéu - comprising Navadvépa; bhümiu - in the lands; dvijavaryaiù - with the best of the twice-born; abhinanditaù - applauded; hariù - taker
away of inauspiciousness; nija-pituù - of His own father; sukha-daù - giver of
happiness; ghe - in the home; sukham - happily, graciously; nivasan - dwelling;
veda-aö-aìga - six branches of the Veda; sahitäm - scripture.
Applauded by the best of the brähmaëa community within those lands comprising
Navadvépa, Çré Hari dwelt happily in the home of his father, giving him great
happiness. He then studied the scriptures embracing the six branches of the Vedas.

nipapäöha guror ghe vasan / paricaryäbhirataù çuci-vrataù
sa ca viçvambhara-saìjïako harir / yuga-dharmäcaraëäya

[p.3]
dharmiëäm 4
hari-kértanam ädiçat smaran / puruñärthäya harer ati-priyam
sa gayäsu pitå-kriyäm caran / hari-pädäìkita-bhümiñu svayam 5
nipapäöha - He studied; guroù - of the spiritual preceptor; ghe - in the home;
vasan - staying; paricarya - service; abhirataù - attached; çuci-vrataù - devoted to
cleanliness; saù - He; ca - and; viçvambhara-saìjïakaù - known as Viçvambhara;
hariù - who takes away inauspiciousness; yuga-dharma - prescribed duty for the
age; äcaraëäya - to set example; dharmiëäm - for godly men; hari-kértanam - the
chanting of Hari's names; ädiçat - instructed; smaran - remembering; puruaarthäya - for the sake of the living entities; hareù - of Hari; ati-priyam - very
dear; saù - He; gayäsu - in the lands comprising Gayä; pit-kriyäm - the last rites
of His father; caran - performing; hari-päda-aìkita - marked with the footprint
of Hari; bhümiu - in the lands; svayam - in person.
When He stayed at the home of His guru, He would show an attachment to service
and devotion to cleanliness. Considering the ultimate needs of men as spritual,
Viçvambhara Çré Hari, proclaimed the thing most dear to His heart, Çré Hari-näma,
as the process of spiritual enlightenment for the age. In Gayä, where the stone is
marked with the footprint of Çré Hari, He Himself performed the last rites for His
father.

nija-sasmti-mätra-sampadaù / pulaka-prema-jaòo babhüva ha
sa tadä nijam eva mandira / samagädäçarérayä girä 6
nija-sasmåti - His own remembranceas Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa; mätra-sampadaù only enjoyment; pulaka - hairs standing erect; prema - love of God; jaòaù insensitive; babhüva - He became; ha - indeed; saù - He; tadä - then; nijam - own;
eva - certainly; mandiram - home; samagädä - He went; açarérayä - from one
without a gross body; girä - by a message.
Thence onwards, His sole enjoyment lay in the remembrance of His confidential
identity and indifferent to the external world, His hairs thrilled in jubilation.

[p.4]
However directed by a message spoken from the sky, He then returned from Gayä to
His family home.

bhakta-varga-mukha-veöitaù prabhuù / prema-päka-paripürëavigrahaù
hari-kértana-sat-kathä-sukham / mumude dänava-siha-mardanaù 7
bhakta-varga - society of devotees; mukha - chiefs; veöitaù - surrounded;
prabhuù - the Master; prema-päka - maturity of love; paripürëa - completely full;
vigrahaù - form; hari-kértana - decriptions of Hari; sat-kathä - pure topics;
sukham - happiness; mumude - He enjoyed; dänava-siha-mardanaù - the crusher
of the lions among the demons.
There the Master showed the mature stage of pure love for Kåñëa. Surrounded by
the chiefs of the community of devotees, delighting in Hari-kértana and Kåñëa-kathä,
He crushed the lions amongst the demons.

athäsya kérti çravaëämta satäm / udära-kérteù çrutibhiù pipäsubhiù
vigähitu çré-yuta-sat-kathä çubhäm / uväha haräçru-vilola-locanaù 8
atha - thereafter; asya - of Him; kértim - fame; çravaëa-amtam - nectar of
hearing; satäm - of good men; udära-kérteù - on account of His wide-spread
fame; çrutibhiù - by the ears; pipäsubhiù - thirsty; vigähitum - to bathe; çré-yuta connected with the goddess Lakñmé; sat-kathäm - tales of the Absolute Lord;
çubhäm - auspicious; uväha - He presented; hara - pleasure; açru - tears; vilolalocanaù - eyes rolling.
Muräri Gupta, an associate of the golden lord, presented this pure and auspicious
history for the sake of the saints who forever hanker to drink through their thirsty
ears glorious nectar about the Lord of wide-spread fame. Since His heart was
enlivened by this chance for Gaura-kathä, Murari's eyes rolled to and fro and he
shed tears of joy.

bhaktaù çréväsa-nämä dvija-kula-kamala-prollasac-citra-bhänu

[p.5]
präheda çré-muräri tvam iha vada hareù çré-caritra navénam

tasyäjïäm äkalayya prakaöa-kara-puöais ta namasktya bhüyaù
çrémac-caitanya-mürteù kali-kalua-harä kértim äha svaya saù 9

bhaktaù - devotee; çréväsa-nämä - of the name Çréväsa; dvija-kula - community
of brähmaëas; kamala - lotus; prollasat - brightly shining; citra-bhänu wonderful sun; präha - He said; idam - this; çré-murärim - Çré Muräri Gupta;
tvam - you; iha - now; vada - do tell; hareù - of Çré Hari; çré-caritram - splendid
character; navénam - unique; tasya - his; ajïäm - order; äkalayya - surrendering;
prakaöa-kara-puöaiù - with folded hands; tam - him; namasktya - bowing down;
bhüyaù - again and again; çrémat-caitanya-mürteù - of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya's form;
kali-kalua - the filthy qualities of the age of quarrel; haräm - takes away; kértim fame; äha - He said; svayam - spontaneously; saù - He.
Bhakta Çréväsa was like the effulgent sun bringing into bloom the lotus hearts of
the twice-born. He instructed Muräri Gupta, "Now the time has come. You must
narrate the unique and ever-fresh history of Çré Hari." With folded hands, Çré Muräri
surrendered to his order, bowing repeatedly at Çré Çréväsa's feet. Then also to fulfill
his own heart's desire, Muräri described the glory of Çré Caitanya's person, which
dispells the depraved qualities of Kali.

atha sa cintayäm äsa / vaidya-sünur murärikaù
katha vakyämi bahv-arthä / caitanyasya kathä çubhäm 10
yad vaktu naiva çaknoti / väcaspatir api svayam
tathäpi vaiëavädeça / kartu yukta matir mama 11
atha - then; saù - he; cintayämäsa - he thought; vaidya-sünuù - son of an
Ayurvedic physician; murärikaù - Muräri Gupta; katham - how; vakyämi - shall I
relate; bahu-arthäm - with much meaning; caitanyasya - of Caitanya; kathäm tale; çubhäm - auspicious; yat - what; vaktum - to speak; na - not; eva - surely;
çaknoti - able; väcaspati - Bhaspati; api - even; svayam - himself; tathäpi - still;
vaiëava-ädeçam - order of the vaiñëava; kartum - to do; yuktam - connected;

[p.6]
matiù - mind; mama - my.
Muräri, the son of a physician, then deliberated, "How can one so lowly as I relate
the tale of Çré Caitanya, which is so auspicious and filled with significance, when
even Båhaspati himself, the master of eloquence, surely could not do so? Still, I am
duty-bound to serve the vaiñëava's order.

nirmalä bhäti satata / këa-smaraëa-sampadä
vaiëaväjïä hi phala-dä / bhaviyati na cänyathä 12
nirmala - spotless; bhäti - shines; satatam - eternally; këa-smaraëa-sampadä the opulence derived from remembrance of Kåñëa; vaiëava-äjïä - the order of
the vaiñëava; hi - certainly; phala-dä - gives fruit; bhaviyati - it will be; na - not;
ca - and; anyathä - another way.
"The opulence shining from Çré Kåñëa's remembrance is my perpetual and spotless
illumination. Certainly the vaiñëava's order and no other means can be fruitful."

ity uktvä vaktum ärebhe / bhagavad-bhakti-bhitäm
kathä dharmärtha-kämäya / mokäya viñëu-bhaktaye 13
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; vaktum - to speak; ärebhe - he began; bhagavat-bhaktibhitäm - which is nourished by devotion to the Supreme Lord; kathäm - tale;
dharma-artha-kämäya - for religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification; mokäya - for liberation; viñëu-bhaktaye - for devotion to Lord
Viñëu.
So saying, He began to narrate His history, which is nurtured by devotion to the
Supreme Lord, which increases the benefits of religiosity, economic development,
sense pleasure, liberation, and ultimately awards devotion to Çré Viñëu.

namämi caitanyam aja purätanam / caturbhuja çaìkha-gadäbjacakriëam

[p.7]
çrévatsa-lakmäìkita-vakasa hari / sad-bhäla-salagna-maëi
suväsasam 14
namämi - I offer my obeisances; caitanyam - to Çré Caitanya; ajam - unborn;
purätanam - primeval; catu-bhujam - with four arms; çaìkha - conch; gadä club; abja - lotus; cakriëam - who bears the Sudarçana disc; çré-vatsa-lakñma sign of the residence of Çré Lakñmé; aìkita - marked; vakasa - chest; harim - Lord
Hari; sat-bhäla - pure brow; salagna - decorated; maëim - pearl; suväsasam dressed in fine cloth.
I offer obeisances unto Çré Caitanya. He is the very same unborn primeval Lord
Hari, who bears in His four hands the conch, club, lotus and disc, whose chest is
marked with Çrévatsa. His pure brow is adorned by a pearl, and he is clad in fine
raiment.

vadämi käïcid bhagavat-kathä satä / haräya kiïcid skhalana
yathäbhavet
tadätra saçodhayitu mahattamäù / pramäëam evätra paropakäriëaù
15
vadämi - I speak; käïcit - somewhat; bhagavat-kathäm - history of the Supreme
Lord; satäm - of the saints; haräya - for the pleasure; kiïcit - sometimes;
skhalanam - faulty grammatical arrangement; yathä - as; bhavet - it may be; tadä then; atra - here; saçodhayitum - to render fully pure; mahattamäù - great souls;
pramäëam - authority; eva - surely; atra - here; para-upakäriëaù - performers of
the supreme welfare activity.
For the pleasure of the saints, I shall speak some narrations of the Lord's pastimes.
Therein some grammatical errors may occur. At such times may the great souls
engaged in the ultimate welfare activity bless me and render my work pure, for it is
on their authority that I write.

navadvépa iti khyäte / ketre parama-vaiëave

[p.8]
brähmaëäù sädhaväù çäntäù / vaiëaväù sat-kulodbhaväù 16
navadvépe - in Navadvépa Dhäma; iti - thus; khyäte - famed; ketre - in the land;
parama-vaiëave - the supreme holy place for vaiñëavas; brähmaëäù - those who
understand spirit; sädhaväù - saints; çäntäù - peaceful persons; vaiëaväù devotees of Lord Viëu; sat-kula-udbhaväù - those born of pure lineage.
In the supreme holy place for vaiñëavas renowned as Çré Navadvépa, there dwelt
self-controlled and saintly vaiñëava-brähmaëas born of pure lineage.

mahäntaù karma-nipuëäù / sarve çästrärtha-päragäù
anye ca santi bahuço / bhiak-çüdra-vanig-janäù 17
mahäntaù - great souls; karma-nipuëäù - expert in their work; sarve - all; çästraartha-päragäù - conversant in all the scriptures; anye - others; ca - and; santi there are; bahuçaù - many; bhiak - physicians; çüdra - craftsmen; vanik merchants; janäù - people
They were all great souls, expert in their work and conversant in the conclusions
of the çästras. Many others, such as physicians, craftsmen, and merchants also lived
there.

sväcära-niratäù çuddhäù / sarve vidyopajévinaù
tatra deva-vratäù sarve / vaikuëöha-bhavanopame 18
sva-äcära-niratäù - attached to their own prescribed duties; çuddhäù - pure;
sarve - all; vidyä-upajévinaù - living off their lore; tatra - there; deva-vratäù devoted to the Lord; sarve - all; vaikuëöha-bhavana - the abode of Vaikuëöha, i.e.
without anxiety; upame - like.
All of them were attached to following the duties prescribed in the scriptures
according to their nature, and thus they remained in a purified state by simply
gaining their bodily maintenance through their respective kinds of knowledge. They
devoted their work to the Lord, and for this reason Navadvépa appeared like

[p.9]
Vaikuëöha, the abode of the Lord, where anxiety is unknown.

çréväso yatra reje hari-pada-kamala-prollasan-matta-bhìgaù
premärdrottuìga-bähuù parama-rasa-madair gäyatéça sadotkaù

gopénätho dvijägryaù çravaëa-patha-gate nämni këasya matto
ity uccai rauti bhüyo laya-tarala-karo ntyati smätivelam 19

çréväsaù - Çréväsa häkura; yatra - where; reje - shone; hari-pada - the feet of the
Lord; kamala - lotus; prollasat - brilliantly shining; matta - intoxicated; bhìgaù bee; prema - love; ärdra - melted; uttuìga-bähuù - arms spread high; parama transcendental; rasa - emotions; madai - with divine madness; gäyati - he sings;
éçam - of the Lord; sadä - always; utkaù - intensely longing; gopé-näthaù Gopénätha _cärya; dvija-agryaù - the best of the twice-born; çravaëa - hearing;
patha-gate - taken to the way; nämni - in the name, the Hare Kåñëa mahämantra;
këasya - of Kåñëa; mattaù - intoxicated; iti - thus; uccaiù - loudly; rauti - he crys;
bhüyaù - again; laya - song, dance and instrumental music; tarala - a wave;
karaù - causer; ntyati - he dances; sma - did; ativelam - exceeding the shores.
There Çréväsa shone like a bee intoxicated by the brilliant lotus-like feet of Çré
Hari. His arms were spread wide and high, and his body was wet with tears of
prema actuated by transcendental emotions which manifest themselves in symptoms
of divine madness. Incessantly he sang about Çré Kåñëa, inspired by intense longing
for Him. Another advanced brähmaëa Gopénätha _cärya, took to the path of hearing
Çré Näma-japa. Then fully intoxicated with Kåñëa-prema, Gopénätha would again
and again loudly cry out His names. He thus created a wave of song, dance and
music on which he would dance like the ocean flooding its shores.

bälodyad-bhäskaräbho budha-jana-kamalodbodhane daka-mürtiù
käruëyäbdhir himäçor iva jana-hdayottäpa-çänty-eka-mürtiù

prema-dhyänäti-dako naöana-vidhi-kalä-sad-guëäyo mahätmä
çré-yuktädvaita-varyaù parama-rasa-kaläcärya éço vireje 20

bäla - newly; udyat - rising; bhäskara - sun; abhaù - hue; budha-jana thoughtful persons; kamala - lotuses; udbodhane - in awakening; daka-mürtiù -

[p.10]
epitome of expertise; käruëya-abdhiù - ocean of compassion; hima-açoù - of the
cool-rayed one (the moon); iva - like; jana-hdaya - hearts of men; uttäpa burning; çänti-eka-mürtiù - His form solely made of peace; prema-dhyäna contemplation in love of Kåñëa; ati-dakaù - very expert; naöana-vidhi - the
principles of dancing; kalä - parts; sat-guëa - good qualities; äyaù - original;
mahä-ätmä - magnanimous; çré-yukta - resplendent; advaita - Çré Advaita; varyaù
- chief; parama - best; rasa-kalä - phases of the mellows of divine love; äcärya teacher; éçaù - the Lord; vireje - ruled.
Çré Advaita _cärya's luster resembled the rays of the early rising sun. Adept in
arousing Kåñëa consciousness in the lotus hearts of thoughtful men, His compassion
was as broad as the ocean, and His cool moon-like personali-ty extinguished the fire
of lust in the hearts of all. He was very expert in practicing loving meditation on Çré
Gaura, and possessed unparalleled expertise in the dance of transcendence. That
magnanimous and resplendent Advaita ruled as the chief of the community of
devotees, and by His example He taught them the science of realizing the ultimate
rasa.

yatra sarva-guëavän ati-reje / candra-çekhara-guru-dvija-räjaù
këa-näma-kitäìga-ruhaù sa / praskhalan nayana-väribhir ärdraù
21
yatra - where; sarva - all; guëavän - virtuous person; ati-reje - shone above all;
candra-çekhara - Çré Candra Çekhara _cärya; guru-dvija-räjaù - king of the
brähmaëa spiritual masters; këa-näma - the name of Kåñëa; kita - attracted; aìgaruhaù - hairs; saù - he; praskhalan - stumbling; nayana-väribhi - by tears; ärdraù wet.
In that abode of Navadvépa where Çré Candra Çekhara _cärya, sovereign of the gurubrähmaëas and the abode of all virtue, shone in transcendence, hairs erect, thrilled
by Kåñëa's names, and soaked by tears flooding from his eyes as he reeled under the
impact of Çré Näma...

yatra ntyati munau hari-däse / däsa-vatsalatayä jagad-éçaù

[p.11]
khe-caraiù sura-gaëaiù sa-maheçair / läsyam äçu paripaçyati htaù
22
yatra - where; ntyati - dances; munau - sage; hari-däse - named Çré Haridäsa;
däsa-vatsalatayä - out of parental affection for his servant; jagat-éçaù - Lord of
the universe; khe-caraiù - by those who travel in space; sura-gaëaiù - with the
hosts of demigods; sa-mahä-éçaiù - with the great controllers; läsyam - dance;
äçu - swiftly; paripaçyati - perceived in full; htaù - jubilant.
...where the Lord of the universe danced out of paternal affection for the sage
Haridäsa, who rejoiced together with the siddhas, demigods and principal
controllers of the universe, as he minutely observed that dance...

yatra viëu-pada-sambhavä sarid / vegavaty atitarä karuëärdrä
sparddhayä ravi-sutä-sarayünä / yä dadhära kanakojjvala harim 23
yatra - where; viëu-pada-sambhavä - born of the foot of Vämana-deva; sarit river; vegavaté - swift-flowing; atitarä - grandeur; karuëä - out of compassion;
ärdrä - melted; sparddhayä - out of rivalry; ravi-sutä-sarayünäm - of the Yamunä
and Sarayü rivers; yaù - who; dadhära - she held; kanaka - golden; ujjvalam brilliant; harim - Çré Hari.
...where, brought forth from the foot of Vämana-deva, the swiftly-flowing river
Gaìgä glides in grandeur. Her ice is melted by compassion for all conditioned souls,
and out of rivalry with the Yamunä river, who once embraced Çré Kåñëa, and the
Sarayü, who embraced Çré Räma Candra, she at last embraces Çré Hari in His
brilliant golden form at Navadvipa.

jagannäthas tasmin dvija-kula-payodhéndu-sadço
'bhavad vedäcäryaù sakala-guëa-yukto guru-samaù

sa këäìghri-dhyäna-prabalatara-yogena manasä
viçuddha-premärdro nava-çaçi-kaleväçu vavdhe 24

jagat-näthaù - Jagannätha Miçra; tasmin - there; dvija-kula - community of

[p.12]
brähmaëas; payodhi - ocean; indu - moon; sa-dçaù - like; abhavat - became; vedaäcäryaù - teacher of the Vedas; sakala - all; guëa - good qualities; yuktaù embued; guru-samaù - like a virtuous spiritual master; saù - He; këa-aìghri - the
feet of Çré Kåñëa; dhyäna - meditation; prabalatara - very powerful; yogena - by
joining; manasä - with His mind; viçuddha - extremely pure; prema-ärdraù heart softened out of love; nava-çaçi - new moon; kalä - phases; iva - like; äçu soon; vavdhe - prospered.
There, Jagannätha Miçra came to reside. He appeared like the moon shining on an
ocean of pure brähmaëa dynasties. He was an equipoised guru, a teacher of the
Vedas, and was endowed with all godly attributes. His mind was absorbed in
profound meditation on Çré Kåñëa's feet. His spotless heart melted out of love for
Him, and soon day by day Jagannätha began to prosper appearing like the moon in
its waxing fortnight.

Thus ends the First Sarga entitled "A Summary of Çré Gauräìga's Mission," in
the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Second Sarga
çré-näradänutäpa
The Lamentation of Çré Närada

atha tasya guruç cakre / sarva-çästrärtha-vedinaù
padavém iti tattva-jïaù / çréman-miçra-purandaraù 1
atha - now; tasya - of Jagannätha Miçra; guruù - teacher; cakre - made; sarvaçästra-artha-vedinaù - of one who knows the purpose of all the scriptures;
padavém - title; iti - thus; tattva-jïaù - one who knows the truth; çrémat-miçrapurandaraù - Çrémat Miçra Purandara.

[p.13]
Now, that Jagannätha was once awarded by his guru the title of a professor of the
Absolute Truth, "Çrémän Miçra Purandara," because of his under-standing of the
essential teaching of all Vedic literature.

tam ekadä sat-kuléna / paëòita dharmiëä vara
çréman nélämbaro näma / cakravarté mahämanäù 2
samähüyäd ädat kanyäm / çacé sa kula-ktçadaù
tä präpya so 'pi vavdhe / çacém iva purandaraù 3
tam - him; ekadä - once; sat-kulénam - of a noble family; paëòitam - learned
scholar; dharmiëäm - of good men; varam - the best; çréman nélämbaraù näma
cakravarté - of the name Çré Nélämbara Cakravarti; samähüyät - called for; ädat gave; kanyäm - daughter; çacém - Çacé; sa - he; kula-kt-çadaù - who promotes his
family's interests; täm - she; präpya - getting; saù - he; api - and; vavdhe prospered; çacém - Çacé; iva - like; purandaraù - Indra.
One day, the great soul Çréman Nélämbara Cakravarté, who was expert in
promoting the best interests of his family, called for that learned and virtuous
brähmaëa and offered him his daughter Çacé in marriage. Accepting her, Jagannätha
prospered like Indra in the company of his own wife, Çacé.

tato ghe nivasatas / tasya dharmo vyavardhata
ätithyaiù çäntikaiù çaucair / nitya-kämya-kriyä-phalaiù 4
tataù - then; ghe - in the home; nivasata - dwelling; tasya - his; dharmaù occupational duty; vyavardhata - prospered; ätithyaiù - with guests; çäntikaiù by ceremonies to relieve one of the results of impious activities; çaucaiù - by
acts of cleanliness; nitya-kämya-kriyä - desirable daily action; phalaiù - with
benefits.
Thereafter as he dwelt in his home, Jagannätha thrived in his occupational duties.
These consisted of receiving guests and performing ceremonies to relieve them of

[p.14]
the results of past impious deeds, from defilement caused by the death of a relative.
He also assisted them in achieving the results of their daily pious activities.

tatra kälena kiyatä / tasyäñöau kanyakäù çubhäù
babhüvuù kramaço daivät / täù païcatva gatäù çacé 5
tatra - then; kälena - by time; kiyatä - after considerable; tasya - from him;
añöau - eight; kanyakäù - daughters; çubhäù - beautiful; babhüvuù - they were;
kramaçaù - one after the other; daivät - by the will of the Lord; täù - they;
païcatvam - death; gatäù - went; çacé - Çrématé Çacé Devé.
As time passed, Çacé Devé bore eight beautiful daughters. But by the design of
Providence one after another they died.

vätsalya-duùkha-taptena / jagäma manasä harim
puträrtha çaraëa çrémän / pit-yajïa cakära saù 6
vätsalya-duùkha - parental grief; taptena - because of suffering; jagäma - he
went; manasä - with his mind; harim - to Lord Hari; putra-artham - for the
purpose of a son; çaraëam - shelter; çrémän - Jagannätha Miçra; pit-yajïam sacrifice for his forefathers; cakära - performed; saù - he.
Burning with paternal sorrow, Çacé took shelter of Lord Hari within her heart, and
Jagannätha performed a sacrifice for his ancestors with the purpose of begetting a
son.

kälena kiyatä lebhe / putra sura-sutopamam
mudam äpa jagannätho / nidhi präpya yathä 'dhanaù 7
kälena kiyatä - after some time; lebhe - he got; putram - son; sura-suta-upamam
- like the son of a god; mudam - bliss; äpa - he got; jagannäthaù - Jagannätha
Miçra; nidhim - treasure; präpya - getting; yathä - as; adhanaù - a man without
wealth.

[p.15]
After some time had passed, He indeed received a son who verily appeared like the
son of a god. Jagannnätha became very glad, like a penniless man who finds a
valuable treasure.

näma tasya pitä cakre / çrémato viçvarüpakaù
paöhatä tena kälena / svalpenaiva mahätmanä 8
vedäç ca nyäya-çästra ca / jïätaù sad-yoga uttamaù
sa sarva-jïaù sudhéù çäntaù / sarveäm upakärakaù 9
näma - name; tasya - His; pitä - father; cakre - gave; çrémataù viçva-rüpakaù Çrémän Viçvarüpa; paöhatä - by study; tena - by that; kälena - in time; su-alpena by a very little; eva - indeed; mahätmanä - by that great soul; vedän - the Vedas;
ca - and; nyäya-çästram - scripture of logic; ca - and; jïätaù - known; sat-yoga connection with the Absolute Truth; uttamaù - transcendental; saù - he; sarvajïaù - all-knowing; sudhéù - very thoughtful; çäntaù - peaceful; sarveäm - of all
people; upakärakaù - performer of welfare activities.
His father named the boy Çrémän Viçvarüpa. That great-hearted child was always
linked in meditation on the Supreme Lord. After studying only a short time, He
mastered the Vedas and the Nyäya-çästra. He was all-knowing, very thoughtful, and
strived to benefit everyone.

harer dhyäna-paro nitya / viaye näkaron manaù
çrémad-bhägavata-rasäsväda-matto niräntaram 10
hareù - of Hari; dhyäna-paraù - absorbed in contemplation; nityam - always;
viaye - in sense pleasure; na - not; akarot manaù - did put his mind; çrématbhägavata - Çrémad Bhägavatam; rasa - mellows; äsväda - to relish; mattaù delighted; nirantaram - without interruption.
Viçvarüpa was always absorbed in contemplating Çré Hari within His heart. His
mind never strayed towards sense-objects, but he found incessant delight in

[p.16]
relishing the mellows of Çrémad-Bhägavatam.

tasyänujo jagad-yonir / ajo jajïe svaya prabhuù
indränujo yathopendraù / kaçyapäd aditeù sutaù 11
tasya - his; anu-jaù - younger brother; jagat-yoni - the womb of the universe;
ajaù - unborn; jajïe - born; svayam - Himself; prabhuù - Lord; indra-anujaù younger brother of Lord Indra; yathä - as; upendra - Çré Vämana-deva, the
dwarf avatära; kaçyapät - from Kaçyapa Muni; aditeù - of Adité; sutaù - the son.
Although He is the unborn Supreme Lord and origin of all worlds, still Çré Hari
took birth as the younger brother of Viçvarüpa, just as Vämana-deva was born as the
son of Adité and Kaçyapa Muni, and thus appeared to be the younger brother of
Indra.

hari-saìkértana-parä / ktvä tri-jagaté svayam
uitvä ketra-pravare / puruottama-saìjïake 12
hari-saìkértana - chanting of the names of Hari; paräm - absorbed; ktvä made; tri-jagatém - the three worlds; svayam - spontaneously; uitvä - lived; ketrapravare - in the best of holy places; purua-uttama-saìjïake - known as Çré
Puruñottama Kñetra (Jagannätha Puri).
And by His own sweet will that Lord immersed the three worlds in hari-nämasaìkértana, while residing in the best of holy places known as Puruñottama Kñetra.

ktvä bhakti harau çikä / kärayitvä janasya saù
çré-vndävana-mädhuryam / äsvädyäsvädayan janän 13
ktvä - made; bhakti - devotion; harau - to Hari; çikäm - instruction; kärayitvä generated; janasya - of the people; saù - He; çré-vndävana-mädhuryam - the
sweetness of Våndävana; äsvädya - relishable; äsvädayan - caused to relish; janän
- the people.

[p.17]
He taught men Hari-bhakti and inspired them to teach it to others. He tasted the
relishable sweetness of Çré Våndävana and made all the humanity taste it also.

tärayitvä jagat ktsna / vaikuëöha-sthaiù prasädhitaù
jagäma nilaya hto / nijam eva maharddhimat 14
tärayitvä - having brought beyond; jagat - the universe; ktsnam - entire;
vaikuëöha-sthaiù - by the residents of the spiritual world; prasädhitaù - assisted;
jagäma - He went; nilayam - abode; htaù - joyous; nijam - own; eva - certainly;
mahä-ddhimat - very flourishing.
Assisted by the residents of Vaikuëöha, He led all living beings of the cosmos
across the hurdle of birth and death, and then joyously returned to His own abode,
where His internal potency flourishes in wonderful ways.

etac chrutvädbhuta präha / brahmacäré jitendriyaù
çré-Caitanya-kathä-mattaù / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù 15
etat - this; çrutvä - hearing; adbhutam - wonderful; präha - said; brahmacäré celibate; jita-indriyaù - sense controlled; çré-caitanya-kathä-mattaù - delighted
by the narrations of Çré Caitanya; çré-dämodara-paëòitaù - Çri Dämodara Paëita.
There was a sense-controlled brahmacäré of the name Çré Dämodara Paëita, whose
heart was thrilled by the topics of Çré Caitanya. He had heard of this wonderful
history.

kathayasva kathä divyäm / adbhutä loka-pävaném
yä çrutvä mucyate lokaù / sasäräd ghora-kilbiät 16
kathayasva - tell; kathäm - story; divyäm - divine; adbhutäm - astonishing; lokapävaném - purifier of the world; yäm - which; çrutvä - hearing; mucyate - frees;
lokaù - the world; sasärät - from material existence; ghora-kilbiät - from terrible

[p.18]
sins.
Damodara said to me, "Narrate to me this divine and miraculous history, for it will
cleanse the polluted consciousness of these material worlds. By hearing it, mankind
can become freed from this repeated cycle of birth and death which is plagued with
horrible sins.

çri-këa-caraëämbhoje / parama-prema-sampadaù
äyante sarva-lokasya / tad vadasva hareù kathäm 17
çri-këa-caraëa-ambhoje - at the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa; parama-prema supreme love; sampadaù - opulences; jäyante - is born; sarva - all; lokasya - for
the world; tat - that; vadasva - please relate; hareù - of Hari; kathäm - the history.
"Therefore please narrate the chronicle of Çré Hari's pastimes by which the
transcendental opulences of love for Çré Kåñëa-caraëämbhoja can awaken in the
hearts of all people.

kasya hetoù pthivyä sa / jätaù sarveçvaro vibhuù
kta kim iha tenaiva / jagatäm éçvareëa ca 18
kasya - for what?; hetoù - reason; pthivyäm - on the earth; saù - He; jätaù born; sarva-éçvaraù - the controller of everything; vibhuù - omni-present; ktam done; kim - why; iha - in this world; tena - by that; eva - indeed; jagatäm - of the
worlds; éçvareëa - by the controller; ca - and.
"What was the reason that the omnipresent and omnipotent Personality of
Godhead took birth on this earth, and what did the universal Lord accomplish
during His manifest presence in this world?

vaktum arhasi bhadräëi / karmäëi maìgaläni ca
jagatä täpa-çänty-artha / premärtha sumahätmanäm 19
vaktum - to speak; arhasi - you ought; bhadräëi - pleasing; karmäëi - actvities;

[p.19]
maìgaläni - auspicious; ca - and; jagatäm - of the worlds; täpa - burning; çäntiartham - for peace; prema-artham - for love of God; su-mahä-ätmanäm - for the
great souls
"You should proclaim His sublime and auspicious deeds, for by hearing them the
burning anguish existing amongst the inhabitants of these material worlds will be
pacified, and pure Kåñëa-prema will awaken in the hearts of great souls."

tac çrutvä vacana tasya / paëòitasya mahätmanaù
uväca vacana préto / muräriù çrüyatäm iti 20
tat - that; çrutvä - having heard; vacanam - the words; tasya - his; paëòitasya of the scholar; mahätmanaù - of the magnanimous; uväca - said; vacanam statement; prétaù - pleased; muräriù - Muräri Gupta; çrüyatäm - hear from me; iti
- thus.
Hearing the words of that noble and magnanimous scholar, Muräri Gupta felt
pleased and answered, "Hear me.

sädhu te kathayiyämi / yathä çaktyä dvijottama
saìkepäd vistarän nälam / vaktu çaknoti bhärgavaù 21
sädhu - O virtuous devotee; te - to you; kathayiyämi - I shall describe; yathä
çaktyä - according to my ability; dvija-uttama - best of brähmaëas; saìkepät - in
summary; vistarät - at length; na - not; alam - even; vaktum - to speak; çaknoti he is able; bhärgavaù - the descendant of Bhågu.
"O virtuous devotee! Best of brähmaëas! Surely I shall relate to you the history of
the Lord, as much as I am able, but I shall only give a summary, for even the
eloquent Båhaspati, descendant of Bhågu, would be unable to tell every detail."

atha närado dharmätmä / vare bhärata-saìjïake
vaiëavägryo mahä-tejaù / pürëa-candra-sama-prabhaù 22

[p.20]
kailäça-çikharäkäro / mekhalä-vara-bhüaëaù
aina-carma-dharo viëor / açaù sarva-jana-priyaù 23
sarveäm upakäräya / babhrämäkäça-maëale
mahaté raëayan préto / hari-näma-pragäyatém 24
atha - once; näradaù - Çré Närada Muni; dharma-ätmä - the saintly person; vare
- in the tract of land; bhärata-saìjïake - known as Bhärata; vaiëava-agryaù chief amongst vaiñëavas; mahä-tejaù - very powerful; pürëa-candra - full moon;
sama-prabhah - equally effulgent; kailäça-çikhara - the peak of Mount Kailasha;
äkäraù - appearance; mekhalä - belt; vara - beautiful; bhüaëaù - decoration; ainacarma - deer-skin; dharaù - dressed; madhuraù - sweet; viñëoù - of Lord Viñëu;
açaù - expansion; sarva-jana-priyaù - dear to all people; sarveäm - of all people;
upakäräya - for the benefit; babhräma - wandered; äkäça-maëale - in the sphere
of space, the universe; mahatém - the vénä; raëayan - strumming; prétaù - joyous;
hari-näma-pragäyatém - chanting the names of Hari.
The immensely powerful and saintly Närada is the foremost among vaiñëavas. His
luster is equal to the full moon, and His appearance resembles the peak of Mount
Kailäça. He is ornamented by a very beautiful belt, and is dressed in deerskin. Since
he is an empowered expansion of Lord Viñëu, he is dear to all people. Once, he
wandered through the space of the universal globe, engaged in the welfare of all. As
he joyously plucked on the strings of his vénä and loudly chanted the names of Hari,
he came to the planet known as Bhärata.

drakyämi vaiëava kutra / tatra vatsyämi sämpratam
iti saïcintya manasä / dadarça pthivém imäm 25
drakyämi - I shall see; vaiëavam - devotee of Lord Viñëu; kutra - where?; tatra there; vatsyämi - I shall reside; sämpratam - for the present; iti - thus; saïcintya thinking; manasä - in his mind; dadarça - looked; pthivém - the earth; imäm this.

[p.21]
As He sought throughout the earth, Çré Närada thought, "Oh where can I find a
vaiñëava? If I can find one, for the present I shall make my residence with him.

kalinä päpa-mitreëa / prathitämala-paìkilä
gäm eva mleccha-hasta-sthäm / pracaëòa-kara-çoitäm 26
kalinä - by Kali, quarrel personified; päpa-mitreëa - by the friend of sin;
prathita - fame; amala - spotless; paìkiläm - filthy; gäm - earth; eva - indeed;
mleccha-hasta-sthäm - in the hands of the mlecchas; pracaëòa - excessive; kara taxation; çoitam - dried up.
"Now the earth has become dried up by terrible taxation at the hands of
barbarians, who have abandoned spiritual culture, and by the influence of Kali, the
friend of Sin, her spotless fame has become tarnished."

janäç ca dadçe tatra / päpa-vyädhi-samäkulän
paräpaväda-niratän / çaöhän hrasväyuaù kçän 27
janän - the people; ca - and; dadçe - he saw; tatra - there; päpa - sin; vyädhi disease; samäkulän - afflicted; para-apaväda - speaking ill of others; niratän attached; çaöhän - rogues; hrasva-äyuaù - short-lived; kçän - small in stature.
He saw that due to a sinful life-style the people had become diseased. They were
mischievous rogues, short-lived, small in stature, and much attached to speaking ill
of their neighbors.

räjïaç ca päpa-nipuëän / çüdrän ca yavanän khalän
mlecchän vikarma-niratän / prajä-sarvasva-härakän 28
räjïaù - the rulers; ca - and; päpa-nipuëän - skilled in sin; çüdrän - low-class;
ca - and; yavanän - fallen from the Vedic path; khalän - villains; mlecchän - meateaters; vikarma-niratän - attached to actions against dharma; prajä - citizens;

[p.22]
sarvasva - all the possessions; härakän - plunderers.
The leaders of those people were also men of the lowest caliber. Having fallen from
the path of the Vedas, they had become degraded meat-eaters, expert at promoting
evil, attached to denigrating the spiritual culture of divine virtues, and preoccupied
with exploiting the wealth of their citizens.

çästra-jïän api sädhünä / nindakän ätma-mäninaù
etän bahu-vidhän dtvä / cintayäm äsa näradaù 29
çästra-jïän - learned in the çästras; api - even; sädhünäm - of saints; nindakän fault-finders; ätma-mäninaù - self esteemed; etän - these; bahu-vidhän - many
kinds; dtvä - having seen; cintayäm äsa - He thought; näradaù - Çré Närada
Muni.
Närada saw that even persons who had knowledge of sciptures were blasphemers
of saints and were inflated by self-prestige. Having seen these many kinds of people,
Närada thought as follows...

Thus ends the Second Sarga entitled "The Lamentation of Çré Närada," in the
First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Third Sarga
närada-praçna
Närada Muni Pleads for the Lord's Descent

kaleù prathama-sandhyäyä / nimagneya vasundharä
sarveä päpa-dagdhänä / hari-näma-rasäyanaù 1

[p.23]
kaleù - of the age of Kali; prathama-sandhyäyäm - at the first junction;
nimagnä - perishing; ayam - this; vasundharä - the earth, the abode of treasure;
sarveäm - of all humanity; päpa-dagdhänäm - bitten by the urge for the life of
sin; hari-näma - the name of Hari, the mahä-mantra; rasäyanaù - source of all
mellows, medicine.
"During this period of time joining the age of quarrel with the previous age, the
earth, although the abode of treasure, is perishing due to being covered by ignorant
materialstic people, However there is a medicine, Çré Kåñëa-näma, which is the
abode of all rasa. It is the cure for all these people afflicted by wicked propensities.

tärako 'ya bhavaty eva / vaiëava-dveiëa vinä
ätma-sambhävitä ye ca / ye ca vaiëava-nindakäù 2
ye këa-nämni deheñu / nindeyur manda-buddhayaù
te 'nityä iti vakyante / teä niraya eva hi 3
tärakaù - saviour; ayam - this; bhavati - it is; eva - indeed; vaiëava-dveiëam the vaiñëava-hater; vinä - except; ätma-sambhävitäù - self-aggrandisers; ye - who;
ca - and; ye - who; ca - and; vaiëava-nindakäù - blasphemers of the vaiñëavas; ye who; këa-nämni - in the name of Kåñëa; deheñu- in the Deity-forms; nindeyu they may find fault; manda-buddhayaù - of low intelligence; te - they; anityä impermanent; iti - thus; vakyante - they say; teäm - for them; nirayaù - hell; eva surely; hi - indeed.
Çré Näma can save every one of them, except that person who hates the holy
vaiëava. Sages say that dull-witted and conceited persons, who blaspheme Çré
Kåñëa-näma as well as the arca-vigraha forms of the Lord saying that they are
temporary, have hell as their certain destination.

atra ki syäd upäyo 'yam / iti niçcitya çuddha-dhéù
vaikuëöhäkhya para dhäma / jagäma karuëä-nidhiù 4

[p.24]
atra - then; kim - what?; syät - may be; upäya - means; ayam - this; iti - thus;
niçcitya - determining; çuddha-dhéù - pure intelligence; vaikuëöha-äkhyam known as the place without anxiety; param dhäma - supreme abode; jagäma - he
went; karuëä-nidhiù - the ocean of mercy.
"O! How can this situation be remedied?" Then Närada whose merciful heart is as
broad as an ocean and who possesses clear intelli-gence, travelled to the
transcendental realm of the Lord, known as Vaikuëöha.

atha tri-vedé-parigéyamäna / dadarça vaikuëöham akhaëòa-dhiëyam
sva-tejasä dhvasta-rajaù-samüham / diçä daçäm äpa guëät para
muniù 5
atha - then; tri-vedé-parigéyamänam - glorified by the three Vedas, Rig, Yajuù
and Säma; dadarça - he saw; vaikuëöham - the world free from anxiety; akhaëòadhiëyam - eternal abode; sva-tejasä - by his own potency; dhvasta-rajaùsamüham - free from varieties of impurity; diçäm - of the directions; daçäm - ten;
äpa - obtained; guëät - to the three modes; para - transcendental; muniù - the
sage.
He perceived that spotless eternal abode of the Lord, which is free from all care, all
dust and all inebrity, whose glories are sung by the three Vedas. Upon entering that
world, the sage transcended the ten directions and the three material modes of
goodness, passion and ignorance.

madhu-vratänä nivahair harer yaçaù / pragéyamäna kamalä-vatéu
viräjita ratna-taöäbhiräma- / väpébhir ämukta-latä-sugandhibhiù 6
madhu-vratänäm - of the bees; nivahai - by the multitudes; hareù - of Hari;
yaçaù - the fame; pragéyamänam - sung; kamalä-vatéu - amongst the groups of
lotuses; viräjitam - shone; ratna-taöa - with borders of jewels; abhiräma pleasureable; väpébhiù - with ponds; ämukta - released; latä - creepers;
sugandhibhiù - with fine fragrances.

[p.25]
The shining fame of Çré Hari was loudly hummed by multitudes of bees amongst
clusters of lotuses, within pleasurable jewel-bordered ponds, surrounded by
flowering creepers exuding sublime fragrances.

mäëikya-gehair vaòabhébhir anvitam / gajendra-muktävalibhüitäbhiù
särvartavaiù çäkhibhir anvitam khagair / viküjita candra-çiläpathäòh-yam 7
mäëikya - rubies; gehaiù - with houses; vaòabhébhi - with turrets; anvitam equipped; gajendra-muktä - elephant-pearl; ävali - strands; bhüitäbhiù - with
ornaments; särvartavaiù - of all seasons; çäkhibhiù - with trees; anvitam together; khagaiù - with birds; viküjitam - warbling; candra-çilä - moon-stones;
patha - pathways; aòhyam - enriched.
The abode was embellished by ruby-studded houses with turrets, nicely
ornamented by strands of elephant-pearls. Amidst pathways made of moonstones,
the trees blossomed forth the flowers of all seasons, and in them birds warbled
melodiously.

tatra çriyä juöam aja purätana / lasat-kiréöa-dyuti-raïjitälakam
vikäçi-divyäbja-jitekaëa lasat- / sudhä-karärädhita-sanmukhollasam
8
tatra - there; çriyä - with the goddess of fortune; juöam - worshipped; ajam the unborn; purätanam - primeval; lasat - shining; kiréöa - crown; dyuti - light;
raïjita - charming; alaka - curling locks; vikäçi - radiant; divya - divine; abja lotus; jita - conquered; ékaëam - glance; lasat - shining sudhä-kara - moon;
ärädhita - worshipped; sat-mukha - beautiful face; ullasam - radiant.
There the unborn, primeval Lord was rendered service by the goddess of fortune.
His majestic glittering crown illumined His curling locks. His eyes defeated the
beauty of blossoming lotuses and His radiant face was worshipped by the moon.

[p.26]
lasan-mahä-kuëòala-gaëòa-çobhita / su-kambu-kaëöha
kanakojjvaläç-uka
këa caturbhiù parighopamair bhujair / nélädri-çìga sura-pädapair
iva 9
lasat - shining; mahä-kuëòala - great earrings; gaëòa - cheeks; çobhitam beautified; su-kambu-kaëöham - neck like a conch; kanaka - gold; ujjvala brilliant; açukam - garment; këam - Lord Kåñëa; caturbhiù - with four; parighaupamaiù - like clubs; bhujaiù - with arms; néla - blue-black; adri-çìgam - peak of
a mountain; sura-pädapaiù - with celestial trees; iva - like.
His cheeks were beautified on either side by great sparkling earrings. His
smooth, well-formed neck with three lines resembled a conch, and He wore a
tunic of brilliant gold. With His four mighty club-like arms, He appeared like a
peak of a blue mountain surrounded by celestial desire-trees.

viräjamäna kanakäìgadädibhir / muktävalébhir vara-hema-sütraiù
sa-kiìkiëé-jäla-nibaddha-celol- / lasan-nitamba vara-pädapaìkajam 10
viräjamänam - shining; kanaka - gold; aìgada - bangles; ädibhiù - and so forth;
muktä-avalébhiù - with rows of pearls; vara - beautiful; hema - golden; sütraiù with necklaces; sa-kiìkiëé - with small bells; jäla - net; nibaddha - bound; cela garment; ullasat - brilliant; nitambam - hips; vara - beautiful; päda-paìkajam lotus feet.
He appeared splendid, with His arms encircled by golden bangles and strings of
pearls mounted on fine golden chains swinging from His neck, A net of tiny tinkling
bells was bound upon the brilliant cloth around His hips. His lotus feet were most
precious.

tadéya pädäbja-manojïa-gandham / äghräya haräçru-

[p.27]
tanüruhodgamaiù
visaìjïa eväçu papäta bhümau / sa daëòavat këa-samépato muniù
11
tadéya - His; päda-abja - lotus feet; manojïa - mind-enthralling; gandham fragrance; äghräya - smelling; hara - jubilation; açru - tears; tanüruha - hairs;
udgamaiù - by the erection; visaìjïaù - unconscious; eva - surely; äçu - instantly;
papäta - fell; bhümau - on the earth; saù - he; daëòa-vat - like a stick; këasamépataù - nearby Lord Kåñëa; muniù - the sage.
By smelling the enthralling fragrance of the Lord's lotus feet, tears of jubilation
appeared in the eyes of Çré Närada. His hairs stood erect out of rapture and instantly
He fainted, falling like a rod before Çré Kåñëa.

tataù prasäryäçu kara kta-jïo / ratnäìguré-bhinna-nakha-prabha
prabhuù
mudä spçan mürdhni muner manohara / babhäa éat smitaçobhitänan-aù 12
tataù - then; prasärya - spreading; äçu - quickly; karam - hand; kta-jïaù sympathetic; ratna - bejewelled; aìguri - fingers; bhinna - expanded; nakha nails; prabham - effulgence; prabhuù - the Lord; mudä - happily; spçan touching; mürdhni - on his head; muneù - of the sage; mana-haram - mindenchanting; babhäa - He spoke; éat - slightly; smita - smiling; çobhita beautifying; ananaù - face.
Out of concern the Lord at once spread His open hand with its bejewelled fingers
and effulgent nails and caressed the head of the muni. As a gentle smile illuminated
His face, He uttered the following charming words:

sväyambhuvotthiöa mune mahätman / yan no vadasy ädya karomi
yat te
mamaiva kälo 'yam upägataù svayam / yugeu dharmäcaraëäya

[p.28]
dharmiëäm 13
sväyambhuva - O son of Brahmä; utthiöa - arise; mune - O sage; mahä-ätman - O
great soul; yat - which; naù - of us; vadasi - you say; adya - today; karomi - I do;
yat - what; te - for you; mama - my; eva - certainly; kälaù - time; ayam - this;
upägataù - arrived; svayam - of its own accord; yugeu - after many ages; dharmaäcaraëäya - to show the religious practice; dharmiëäm - for the virtuous.
"Arise, magnanimous sage, son of Brahmä. Whatever you now ask of me, I grant
you, for today, after many millennia, the time has arisen of its own accord for Me to
show the way of virtue for godly men."

tataù samutthäpya mahari-sattama / mahattamaikänta-paräyaëo
hariù
samädideçäsanam äçu tasmai / tasmin niviöo munir äjïayä hareù 14
athänvapcchad bhagavän mune katha / sampräptavän mäm iha ki
tavepsitam
pürëasya kärya karaväëi sädhavo / paropakäräya mahad-viceöitam
15
tataù - then; samutthäpya - raising him up; mahä-åi-sattamam - the best among
great sages; mahattama - the very great souls; eka-anta - exclusive; paräyaëaù favoring; hariù - Lord Hari; samädideça - indicated; äsanam - a seat; äçu quickly; tasmai - for him; tasmin - in the seat; niviöaù - having taken; muniù - the
sage; äjïayä - by the order; hareù - of Hari; atha - then; anvapcchat - questioned;
bhagavän - the Supreme Lord; mune - O sage; katham - how?; sampräptavän have come; mäm - to me; iha - here; kim - what?; tava - your épsitam - desired;
pürëasya - completely; käryam - duty; karaväëi - I must do; sädho - O saint; paraupakäräya - for the highest welfare; mahat - the great; viceöitam - the endeavor.
The heart of Lord Çré Hari is devoted exclusively to those great souls who without
any motivation take complete shelter of His feet. Thus clasping Närada's hand, He

[p.29]
raised him up, and quickly showed him to a seat. And when on Çré Hari's insistence
the sage accepted the seat, the Lord inquired from him, "O sage, what is your reason
for coming here? Please speak your desire. Whatever it may be, it is My duty to
award you complete satisfaction, for saints such as yourself always strive for the
ultimate welfare of others."

ittha sa toyämbuda-tulya-ghoa / vaco 'mta këa-dayämtäbdeù
uväca pürëa-smita-vékayä harer / namämi lokän paripähi duùkhitän
16
ittham - thus; saù - He; toya-ambu-da - water-giver (cloud); tulya - similar;
ghoam - sound; vacaù - statement; amtam - nectar; këa-dayä - Kåñëa's mercy;
amta-abdeù - of the ocean of nectar; uväca - said; pürëa-smita - wide smile;
vékayä - by the glance; hareù - of Hari; namämi - I bow down; lokän - the people;
paripähi - protect; duùkhitän - unhappy.
Spoken by the Lord with a brightly smiling glance, these ambrosial words, had a
deep resonance like the rumblings of a water-laden cloud, a cloud drawn from the
ocean of undying compassion that is Çré Kåñëa. Närada replied, "O Lord, I bow as a
particle of dust at Your feet. Kindly award protection to Your people who are
presently rendered wretched.

kitiù kiëoty adya samäkulä vibho / janasya päpaugha-yutasya
dhäraëät
janäç ca sarve kali-käla-daöäù / päpe ratäs tyakta-bhavat-prasaìgäù
17
kitiù - the earth; kiëoti - is afflicted; adya - today; samäkulä - very disturbed;
vibho - O great Lord; janasya - of the people; päpa - sin; ogha - multitude;
yutasya - engaged; dhäraëät - by maintenance; janäù - the people; ca - and; sarve
- all; kali-käla - by the age of quarrel; daöäù - bitten; päpe - sin; ratäù - attached;
tyakta - given up; bhavat - Your; prasaìgäù - association.
"Today the earth is much disturbed and polluted because of she maintains a

[p.30]
populace engaged in a great variety of iniquitous acts. Everyone is infected by the
vices of Kali. They are solely attached to sinful life and have abandoned the
association of Your Lordship and Your dear servitors.

tän pähi nätha tvad-te na teäm / anyo 'sti pätä nirayät tu sad-gatim
eva vicärya kuru sarva-loka- / nätha svaya sad-gatir éa nänyaù 18
tän - them; pähi - protect; nätha - O Lord; tvat-te - except for Yourself; na not; teäm - for them; anyaù - other; asti - there is; pätä - protector; nirayät - from
hell; tu - indeed; sat-gatim - absolute goal of life; evam - thus; vicärya considering; kuru - do; sarva-loka - all the worlds; nätha - O Lord; svayam Yourself; sat-gatiù - absolute goal of life; éa - O Lord; na - not; anyaù - other.
"O Lord, kindly protect Your people. Other than Yourself, no one can save the
absolute goal of life from the scourges of demonic life. O Lord of all worlds, kindly
consider the situation and do the needful. You are indeed the absolute goal of our
lives. O Lord, there is no other existence beyond You."

ittha samäkarëya muner vaco harir / vidann api präha kim äcariye
kenäpy upäyena bhaved dhi çäntis / tad brühi ta präha punaù
svabhü-sutaù 19
ittham - thus; samäkarëya - hearing; muneù - of the sage; vacaù - the words;
hariù - the dispeller of evil; vidan - knowing; api - even; präha - speak; kim what; äcariye - shall I do; kena - by what; api - and; upäyena - by the means;
bhavet - it may be; hi - certainly; çäntiù - peace; tat - that; brühi - tell; tam - that;
präha - He spoke; punaù - again; svabhü-sutaù - the son of the self-born Brahmä.
Hearing the sage's words, Çré Hari, although in full knowledge, asked, "What I
should do? How can we bring peace to their hearts?" The son of the self-born
Brahmä replied:

svaya suçétaù çata-candramä yathä / bhü-deva-vaçe 'py avatérya sat-

[p.31]
kule
vätsye jagannätha-suteti viçruti / samäpnuhi sva kuru ça dharaëyäù
20
svayam - Yourself; suçétaù - very cooling; çata-candramä - a hundred moons;
yathä - like; bhü-deva-vaçe - in a dynasty of brähmaëas; api - and; avatérya descending; sat-kule - in a pure family; jagannätha-suta - the son of Jagannätha
Miçra; iti - thus; viçrutim - renown; samäpnuhi - obtain; svam - Your own; kuru make; çam - well-being; dharaëyäù - for the earth.
"Descending in a pure dynasty of brähmaëas, the radiance of Your form more
soothing than hundreds of moons, You shall attain wide-spread renown as the son of
Jagannätha Miçra. O my Lord! bring peace to the earth.

rämädi-rüpair bhagavan kta hi / yat päpätmanä räkasa-dänavänäm
vadhädika karma na ceha kärya / mano naräëä pariçodhayasva 21
räma-ädi-rüpaiù - by forms such as Çré Räma; bhagavan - O all-opulent Lord;
ktam - performed; hi - surely; yat - which; päpa-ätmanäm - of sinful persons;
räkasa-dänavänäm - of the man-eaters and demons; vadha-ädikam - killing and
so on; karma - work; na - not; ca - and; iha - in this world; käryam - duty; manaù
- minds; naräëäm - of men; pariodhayasva - fully purify.
"O Bhagavän, Your other avatäras such as Räma and others accom-plished Their
missions by subduing and slaying the wicked räkñasas and demons. At present there
is no such necessity. The only need is to purify the corrupted minds of humanity.

tän äsura bhävam upägatän hi / yadä haniye kva tadästi lokaù
eva vyavasya sva-dhiyätmano yaçaù / präkhyähi lokäù sukhino
bhavantu 22
tän - them; äsuram - demonic; bhävam - nature; upägatän - taken to; hi indeed; yadä - when; haniye - You shall kill; kva - where; tadä - then; asti - there

[p.32]
is; lokaù - the populace; evam - thus; vyavasya - determining; sva-dhiyä - own
intelligence; ätmanaù - own; yaçaù - fame; prakhyähi - declare; lokäù - the
people; sukhinaù - happy; bhavantu - let them be.
"Indeed, if You were to slay all those who have been seduced by the demonic path
of life, would there remain anyone still living anywhere on the earth? Therefore
through Your own wisdom, kindly come to a decision. Proclaim Your fame far and
wide and let the people again become happy and peaceful.

tatraiva rudreëa muni-pravéräù / kartu hi sähäyyam avätariyan
tatheti ta präha hariù surari / so 'pi praëamyäçu jagäma htaù 23
tatra - in this; eva - surely; rudreëa - with Lord Çiva; muni-pravéräù - the best
of the sages; kartum - to do; hi - indeed; sähäyyam - assistance; avätariyan - shall
descend; tathä - also; iti - thus; tam - that; präha - He said; hariù - the dispeller
of evil; sura-im - sage amongst the demigods; saù - He; api - also; praëamya offering obeisances; äçu - swiftly; jagäma - he went; htaù - joyously.
"In this avatära of Yours, the heroes among the sages together with Rudradeva
shall also descend to give You assistance." "So be it," Çré Hari replied to the sage
amongst the gods. Then swiftly the sage jubilantly bowed before the Lord and
departed.

Thus ends the Third Sarga entitled "Närada Muni Pleads for the Lord's
Descent," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *

Fourth Sarga
avatäränukrama
Descriptions of the Avatäras

[p.33]
atha çrutvä tu tat sarva / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù
uväca parama-prétaù / kathyatä n-hareù kathäm 1
atha - so; çrutvä - hearing; tu - indeed; tat - that; sarvam - all; çré-dämodarapaëòitaù - Çré Dämodara Paëita; uväca - said; parama-prétaù - very pleased;
kathyatäm - tell; n-hareù - of the Lord Hari in His form like a nå (man); kathäm the story.
After hearing this extraordinary narration in its entirety, Çré Dämodara Paëita's
heart was much enlivened, and he said to Murari Gupta, "Now kindly relate the epic
of Nåhari.

ke ke taträvatäreu / svavatérëä mahé-tale
avatäräç ca katidhä / tän vadasvänupürvaçaù 2
ke ke - which; tatra - there; avatäreu - amongst the avatäras; su-avatérëäù avatäras of note; mahé-tale - on the earth planet; avatäräù - the Lord's descents
to the material world; ca - and; katidhä - what kinds; tän - those; vadasva - speak
of; anupürvaçaù - consecutively.
"Amongst the avatäras of Çré Hari who have graced the earth planet, which of them
are especially famous by virtue of their unique pastimes? Also, what are the various
kinds of avatäras? Please describe them in order."

iti çrutvä dvijägryasya / vacana çré-murärikaù
uväca parama-prétyä / çrüyatäm iti sädaram 3
iti - thus; çrutvä - having heard; dvija-agryasya - of the exalted brähmaëa;
vacanam - words; çri-murärikaù - Çré Muräri Gupta; uväca - said; parama-prétyä with great love; çrüyatäm - hear; iti - thus; sa-ädaram - with attention.
Hearing the words of the eminent brähmaëa, Çré Muräri was greatly satisfied and

[p.34]
replied, "Kindly hear me attentively."

atha te kathayämy anyat / sväçävatäräëä hareù
çuddha-bhaktatayä khyätän / bhaktän éçvara-rüpiëaù 4
atha - so; te - to you; kathayämi - I shall tell; anyat - other; sva-aça - plenary
portions; avatäräëäm - of the descents of the Lord; hareù - of Çré Hari; çuddha pure; bhaktatayä - by their devotional quality; khyätän - known; bhaktän devotees; éçvara-rüpiëaù - forms of the Lord.
Now I shall describe the plenary avatäras of Çré Hari who due to their pure
devotional qualities are celebrated as devotional forms of éçvara.

ädau jäto dvija-çreöhaù / çré-mädhava-puré prabhuù
éçvaräço dvidhä bhütvädvaitäcäryaç ca sad-guëaù 5
ädau - the first of them all; jätaù - born; dvija-çrethaù - best of brähmaëas; çrémädhava-puré - Çré Mädhavendra Puré; prabhuù - the Lord; éçvara-açaù - a
plenary portion of the Lord; dvidhä - second; bhütvä -became; ädvaita-äcäryaù Çré Advaita _cärya; ca - and; sat-guëaù - a model of good qualities.
The first to appear among them was the best of the twice-born, Çré Mädhava Puré
Prabhu. The second expansion of the Lord, named Çré Advaita _cärya, was a model
of all saintly qualities.

tayoù çiyo 'bhavad devaç / candräçaç candra-çekharaù
sa äcärya-ratna iti / khyäto bhuvi mahä-yaçäù 6
tayoù - of those two; çiyaù - the disciple; abhavat - became; devaù - devotee;
candra-açaù - a plenary portion of the moon-god; candra-çekharaù - named
Candra Çekhara; saù - He; äcärya-ratnaù - the jewel teacher; iti - thus; khyätaù known; bhuvi - on the earth; mahä-yaçäù - of great renown.

[p.35]
Çré Candra Çekhara _cärya was a ray of the moon-god. He became the disciple of
both Çré Mädhavendra Puré and Çré Advaita _cärya, and was widely renowned on
earth as _cärya Ratna, the jewel-like teacher.

çri-näradäça-jäto 'sau / çrémat-çréväsa-paëòitaù
gandharväço 'bhavad vaidyaù / çri-mukunda-sugäyanaù 7
çri-närada-aça - an expansion of Çré Närada Muni; jätaù - was born; asau - he;
çrémat-çréväsa-paëòitaù - Çré Çréväsa Paëita; gandharva-açaù - expansion of a
Gandharva; abhavat - became; vaidyaù - _yurvedic physician; çri-mukundaù - Çré
Mukunda; su-gäyanaù - the excellent singer.
Çré Närada descended as Çré Çréväsa Paëita, and a Gandharva descended as Çré
Mukunda, the physician and superlative singer.

çrémat-çré-haridäso 'bhün / muner açaù çëuva tat
kathita näga-daöena / brähmaëena yathä-purä 8
çrémat-çré-haridäsaù - Çré Haridäsa häkura; abhüt - was; muneù - of a sage; açaù expansion; çëuva - hear; tat - that; kathitam - it is described; näga-daöena named Naga-daöa; brähmaëena - by a brähmaëa; yathä - as; purä - in ancient
times.
As described by the brähmaëa Nägadañöa, Çré Haridäsa häkura was the expansion
of a sage from an ancient time. Please hear of this.

ädau muni-varaù çrémän / rämo näma mahä-tapäù
dräviòe vaiñëava-ketre / so 'vätsét putra-vatsalaù 9
ädau - formerly; muni-varaù - elevated sage; çrémän räma näma - named
Çrémän Räma; mahä-tapäù - great ascetic; dräviòe - in southern India; vaiëavaketre - in a pigrimage place for vaiñëavas; saù - he; avätsét - dwelt; putra-vatsalaù
- affectionate to his son.

[p.36]
The exalted sage and great ascetic of the name Çrémän Räma was very affectionate
to his son. He lived in a place of pilgrimage for vaiñëavas in the southern part of
Bhärata.

tasya putreëa tulasém / prakalya bhojane çubhe
sthäpitä sä 'patad bhümäv / aprakälya punaç ca täm 10
pitre 'dadät punaù so 'pi / çri-rämäkhyo mahä-muniù
dadau bhagavate tena / jäto 'sau yavane kule 11
tasya - his; putreëa - by his son; tulasém - a tulasé leaf; prakalya - after washing;
bhojane - on the foodstuffs for offering to the Lord; çubhe - auspicious; sthäpitä placed; sä - that leaf; apatad - it fell; bhümau - on the earth; aprakälya - without
washing; punaù - again; ca - and; täm - that leaf; pitre - to his father; adadät - he
gave; punaù - again; saù - he; api - and; çri-räma - Çré Räma; äkhyaù - named;
mahä-muniù - the great sage; dadau - he offered; bhagavate - unto the Lord; tena for this reason; jätaù - born; asau - he; yavane - amongst people fallen from
Vedic culture (Muslims); kule - in the family.
Once, his son washed a tulasé leaf and placed it on the auspicious foodstuffs which
had been prepared for offering to the family Deity. That leaf fell to the ground, but
without washing it, the boy replaced it on the offering and gave it to his father. Çré
Räma Mahämuni then offered it to the Supreme Lord. For this reason the muni was
later obliged to take birth in . a family of Yävanas.

sa dharmätmä sudhéù çäntaù / sarva-dharma-vicakaëaù

brahmäço 'pi tataù çrémän / bhakta eva suniçcitaù 12
saù - he; dharma-ätmä - the very heart of virtuous life; su-dhéù - extremely
intelligent; çäntaù - peaceful; sarva-dharma - all spiritual matters; vicakaëaù learned; brahma-açaù - an expansion of Lord Brahmä; api - and; tataù therefore; çrémän - glorious; bhakta - devotee; eva - certainly; su-niçcitaù -

[p.37]
positively ascertained.
Çré Haridäsa was the very breath of dharma. He was extremely intelligent, peaceful,
perceptive and learned in all spiritual matters. Moreover, it is positively ascertained
that this glorious devotee was also a plenary portion of Lord Brahmä.

avadhüto mahä-tejo / nityänando mahattamaù
baladeväçato jäto / maha-yogé svaya prabhuù 13
avadhüta - an ascetic aloof from worldly conventions; mahä-tejaù - very
powerful; nityänandaù - personified perpetual bliss; mahat-tamaù - greatest of
the great; baladeva-açataù - from an expansion of Çré Baladeva; jätaù - born;
maha-yogé - great mystic; svayam - in person; prabhuù - the Lord.
Çré Nityänanda Prabhu is the plenary portion of Çré Baladeva. Although the greatest
of the great, he appears as an avadhüta, and a great mystic. But He is actually the
Supreme Lord Himself, the origin of all emanations.

na tasya kula-çéläni / karmäëi vaktum utsahe
api vara-çatenäpi / bhaspatir api svayam 14
na - not; tasya - His; kula-çéläni - family and character; karmäëi - activities;
vaktum - to speak of; utsahe - attempt; api - even; vara-çatena - with a hundred
years; api - even; bhaspatiù - the priest of the demigods; api - even; svayam Himself.
Even Båhaspati himself with a hundred years at his disposal could hardly attempt
to describe Çré Nityananda's character and activities.

vaktu neçe 'pare kimvä / vaya hi kudra-jantavaù
çré-këa-dvitéyaç cäpi / gauräìga-präëa-vallabhaù 15
vaktum - to speak; na - not; éçe - when the great controller; apare - unrivalled;

[p.38]
kimvä - what to speak of; vayam - we; hi - certainly; kudra - insignificant;
jantavaù - living entities; çré-këa-dvitéyaù - a second only to Lord Kåñëa; ca and; api - even; gauräìga-präëa - life of Gauräìga; vallabhaù - lover.
When Båhaspati, the matchless master of the art of eloquence, is unable to
delineate the qualities of Lord Nityänanda, then what to speak of insignificant living
beings such as ourselves. He is second only to Çré Kåñëa, and is more dear to Lord
Gauräìga than His own life-breath.

anye ca çataço jätä / deväç ca muni-puìgaväù
pthivyäm aça-bhävena / tän na saìkhyätum utsahe 16
anye - others; ca - and; çataçaù - hundreds; jätaù - born; deväù - demigods; ca and; muni-puìgaväù - powerful sages; pthivyäm - on the earth; aça-bhävena - in
the manner of plenary expansions; tän - them; na - not; saìkhyätum - to count;
utsahe - venture.
Hundreds of other demigods took birth on the earth as powerful philosopher-sages,
descending as plenary portions of their original forms . One cannot even venture to
count them.

athävatäro dvi-vidhah / puruasya prakértitaù
yugävatäraù prathamaù / käryärthe 'para-sambhavaù 17
atha - now; avatäraù - of descents of the Lord; dvi-vidhah - two kinds;
puruasya - of the Lord; prakértitaù - declared; yuga-avatäraù - avatäras for the
age; prathamaù - first; kärya-arthe - for a mission; apara - others (lélä-avatäras);
sambhavaù - come forth.
There are two other classes of avatäras declared in the çästras. The former are the
yuga-avatäras, who appear to teach the process of self-realization for the four ages;
the latter are the kärya-avatäras, who appear to accomplish a specific mission.

yugävatäraù kathyante / ye bhavanti yuge yuge

[p.39]
dharmä sasthäpayanti ye / tän çëuva yathä-kramam 18
yuga-avatäraù - the avatäras for the four ages; kathyante - are described; ye which; bhavanti - appear; yuge yuge - age to age; dharmäm - spiritual practices;
sasthäpayanti - establish; ye - which; tän - those; çëuva - now hear; yathäkramam - in order.
The yuga-avatäras are described as those who appear from age to age in order to
establish the principles of religion. Now hear of them in the order in which they
appear.

satye yuge dhyäna ekaù / puruasyärtha-sädhakaù
tad arthe 'vatarat çuklas / catur-bähur jaöä-dharaù 19
satye yuge - in the age of truthfulness; dhyänaù - meditation; ekaù - alone;
puruasya - of man; artha - the goal of life; sädhakaù - the means for attaining; tat
- that; arthe - for the purpose; avatarat -He descended; çuklaù - white; caturbähuù - four-armed; jaöä-dharaù - with matted locks.
In Satya-yuga, the age of truthfulness, meditation was the sole means for mankind
to execute self-realization. For that purpose, the white avatära, Çukla, descended in
a four-armed form with matted locks.

sahasra-candra-sadçaù / sadä dhyäna-rato muniù
sarveäm eva jantünä / dhyänäcäryo babhüva ha 20
sahasra-candra - a thousand moons; sa-dçaù - like; sadä - always; dhyäna-rataù
- attached to meditation; muniù - the sage; sarveäm - for everyone; eva - surely;
jantünäm - for men; dhyäna-äcäryaù - a teacher of meditation; babhüva became; ha - indeed.
Appearing as bright and as cooling as a thousand moons, the sage, absorbed in
constant trance, showed through His example the path of meditation for all men.

[p.40]
tretäyä yajïa evaiko / dharma-sarvärtha-sädhakaù
tatra yajïaù svaya jätaù / çruk-çruvädi-samanvitaù 21
tretäyäm - in the age of Tretä; yajïa - fire sacrifice; eva - surely; ekaù - one;
dharma - spiritual benefits; sarva-artha - all purposes; sädhakaù - accomplisher;
tatra - at that time; yajïaù - sacrifice personified; svayam - Himself; jätaù - was
born; çruk-çruva-ädi-samanvitaù - holding the spoons for sacrifice named Çruk
and Çruva and other implements.
In the next age, Tretä, the practice of fire sacrifice alone conferred all spiritual
benefits on man. At that time the Lord appeared as Yajïa, sacrifice personified. He
held Çruk and Çruva, the sacrificial spoons, and other paraphernalia for sacrifice.

yäjïikair brähmaëaiù särdham / yajïa-bhuk sa janärdanaù
yajïam eväkaroj jiëur / janän sarvän açikayat 22
yäjïikaiù - sacrificing; brähmaëaiù - with the priests; särdham - together; yajïabhuk - the enjoyer of sacrifice; saù - He; jana-ardanaù - the Lord who inspires
the hearts of people; yajïam - sacrfice; eva - indeed; akarot - performed; jiëuù the victorious one; janän - the people; sarvän - all; açikayat - He taught.
Together with the priests of the sacrifice, the victorious Lord Janärdana, who is the
enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice, performed yajïa Himself and thus taught that
process to all people.

dväpare tu yuge püjä / puruärthäya kalpate
iti jïätvä svaya viñëuù / pthu-rüpo babhüva ha 23
dväpare - age of Dväpara; tu - but; yuge - in the age; püjä - Deity worship;
purua-arthäya - for the benefit of man; kalpate - is suitable; iti - thus; jïätvä - so
knowing; svayam - Himself; viñëuù - from viç (to pervade), the all-pervading
one; pthu-rüpaù - King Prithu's form; babhüva - was; ha - indeed.

[p.41]
In the age of Dväpara, püjä, (worship of the Lord's arca-vigraha), was the
appropriate process of self-realization for mankind. Knowing this, Çré Viñëu Himself
incarnated as Mahäräja Prthu.

püjä cakära dharmätmä / lokänä cänuçäsanam
kärayäm äsa püjäyä / sarveäm abhavan manaù 24
püjäm - worship; cakära - he performed; dharma-ätmä - virtuous soul;
lokänäm - of the people; ca - and; anuçäsanam - governing; kärayäm äsa - did;
püjäyäm - in worship; sarveäm - of all men; abhavan - it became; manaù - the
mind.
That virtuous soul regulated the people by His rule. He performed worship of the
Lord and thereby engaged the minds of all men in this same worship.

kalau tu kértana çreyo / dharmaù sarvopakärakaù
sarva-çakti-mayaù säkät / paramänanda-däyakaù 25
kalau - in the age of quarrel; tu - but; kértanam - chanting the Lord's names;
çreyaù - highest benefit; dharmaù - religious practice; sarva-upakärakaù - causer
of welfare for all; sarva-çakti-mayaù - possessed of all potencies; säkät - directly
the Lord; parama-änanda-däyakaù - bestower of the highest transcendental
bliss.
But in the age of Kali which is filled with quarrel, the chanting of the names of Çré
Hari confers all spiritual benefit. It showers welfare upon all living beings. The
Lord's name is possessed of all His potencies. Çré Näma is the Lord, Himself, and in
this form Lord Këa bestows the highest transcendental bliss.

iti niçcitya manasä / sädhunä sukham avahan
jätaù svaya pthivyä tu / çri-caitanya-mahäprabhuù 26
iti - thus; niçcitya - determining; manasä - with the mind; sädhunäm - of the
sädhus; sukham - happiness; avahan - bringing; jätaù - born; svayam - in person;

[p.42]
pthivyäm - on the earth; tu - indeed; çri-caitanya-mahäprabhuù - Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu.
Thus considering the situation, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu personally took birth on
the earth, and thereby brought joy to men of virtue.

kértana kärayäm äsa / svaya cakre mudänvitaù
yugävatärä ete vai / käryärthe cäparän çëu 27
kértanam - chanting; kärayäm äsa - caused to do; svayam - in person; cakre did; mudä-anvitaù - filled with happiness; yuga-avatäräù - avatäras for the ages;
ete - these; vai - certainly; kärya - mission; arthe - for the purpose; ca - and;
aparän - others; çëu - hear.
Filled with bliss, He chanted the names of Hari and thus induced others to also
chant. These are the yuga-avatäras for the four ages. Now hear of the others, the
kärya-avatäras, who descend to perform specific missions.

matsye tu vedoddharaëa / kaurme mandära-dhäraëam
varähe dhäraëa bhümer / nara-siha-vidäraëam 28
matsye - in His Fish avatära; tu - indeed; veda - Vedas; uddharaëam - saving;
kaurme - in the Tortoise avatära; mandära-dhäraëam - holding the Mandära
mountain; varähe - in the Boar avatära; dhäraëam - holding; bhümeù - of the
earth; nara-siha - Man-lion avatäa; vidäraëam - tearing asunder.
Descending in the form of Çré Matsya, the Fish avatära, the Lord saved the Vedas
from the waters of universal devastation. In His form of Çré Kürma, the Tortoise
avatära, He held up the Mandära mountain in order to award nectar to the
demigods. In His form of Çré Varäha-deva, the Boar avatära, the Lord lifted up the
earth and replaced it in its position in the universe. And in His form of Çré Narasiha,
the Man-lion avatära, the Lord tore asunder the chest of the demon Hiraëyakaçipu,
thus protecting the devoted Prahläda.

cakre danuja-çakrasya / vämane bhuvana-çriyam

[p.43]
jigye tu bhärgavaù kauëé / jitvä räjïaù sudurmadän 29
dadau gä brähmaëäyaiva / viëur lokaika-taraëaù
çré-räme rävaëa hatvä / yaçasä pürita jagat 30
cakre - took; danuja-sakrasya - of the powerful demon, Balé; vämane - during
Lord Vämana's avatära; bhuvana-çriyam - the opulence of the world; jigye - He
won; tu - and; bhärgavaù - the descendant of Bhgu, Paraçuräma ("axedelighter"); kauëém - the earth; jitvä - having defeated; räjïaù - the kings; sudurmadän - very arrogant; dadau - He gave; gäm - earth; brähmaëäya - to the
brähmaëa Kaçyapa; eva - indeed; viëuù -the all-pervading One; loka-eka-taraëaù the sole uplifter of the world; çré-räme - during the avatära of Çré Räma; rävaëam
- the ten-headed king of the man-eaters; hatvä - having killed; yaçasä - by His
fame; püritam - filled; jagat - the universe.
Descending as Çré Vämana-deva, a child brähmaëa, the Lord took away the
opulence of the three worlds from the powerful demon Balé. As Çré Paraçuräma, He
descended in the lineage of the sage Bhågu. Delighting in fighting with an axe, He
won the earth by defeating the arrogant kings and then gave it in charity to the
brähmana Kaçyapa. Next Çré Viñëu, sole savior of the universe, descended as Çré
Räma and slew the ten-headed man-eating räkñasa named Rävaëa. Thus all of the
worlds became filled with Viñëu's fame.

çrémat-këävatäre tu / bhümer bhärävatäraëam
svayam eva haris tatra / sarva-çakti-samanvitaù 31
çrémat-këa-avatäre - by the avätära of Çré Kåñëa; tu - and; bhümeù - of the
earth; bhära - burden; avatäraëam - taking away; svayam - original; eva - indeed;
hariù - one who takes away evil; tatra - then; sarva-çakti-samanvitaù - possessing
all potencies.
When Lord Çré Kåñëa descended, He removed the heavy burden of warring armies
from the earth. He is the original form of Çré Hari, replete with all potencies.

bauddhe tu mohana cakre / vedänä bhagavän paraù

[p.44]
mlecchänä nidhana caiva / kalki-rüpeëa so 'karot 32
bauddhe - upon the avatära of Çré Buddha-deva; tu - and; mohanam - illusion;
cakre - He made; vedänäm - for the followers of the Vedas; bhagavän - the
Supreme Lord; paraù - transcendental; mlecchänäm - of those fallen from the
Vedas; nidhanam - destruction; ca - and; eva - surely; kalki-rüpeëa - by the form
of Kalki; saù - He; akarot - performed.
As Çré Buddha-deva, the Lord made an illusion to bewilder the so-called followers
of the Vedas, and in the form of Çré Kalki, He annihilated the degraded mleccha
populace, who had fallen from the path of the Vedas.

eva vidhäny anekäni / karmäëi bahu-rüpinaù
käryävatärä n-hareù / kathitäù paramaribhiù 33
evam - thus; vidhäni - kinds; anekäni - many; karmäëi - activities; bahu-rüpinaù
- who have many forms; kärya-avatäräù - the avatäras for specific missions; nhareù - of Çré Gaura Hari; kathitäù - are spoken of; parama-ibhiù - by the
topmost sages.
Thus do the greatest of sages describe the kärya-avatäras of Nhari, who are of many
kinds, who perform many activities and appear in many forms.

Thus ends the Fourth Sarga entitled "Descriptions of the Avatäras," in the
First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifth Sarga
çré-caitanyävirbhäva

[p.45]
The Appearance of Çré Caitanya

çëuvävahita brahman / caitanyasyävatärakam
navéna jagad-éçasya / karuëä-väridher vibhoù 1
çëuva - hear; avahitam - with attention; brahman - O brähmaëa; caitanyasya of Çré Caitanya; avatärakam - the appearance; navénam - novel; jagat-éçasya - of
the Lord of the universe; karuëä-väridheù - of the ocean of mercy; vibhoh - of
the great, all-pervasive, sense-controlled one.
O brähmaëa, please hear attentively about the unique appearance of that ocean of
compassion, the all-pervasive and sense-controlled Supreme Master of the cosmic
manifestation, Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.

gate devari-varye tu / sväçrame bhagavän paraù
jagannäthasya viprarer / manasy äviçad acyutaù 2
gate - when he had gone; deva-i-varye - best of sages amongst the demigods; tu
- and; sva-äçrame - to his own hermitage; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; paraù
- supreme; jagannäthasya - of Jagannätha Miçra; viprareù - of the brähmaëasage; manasi - in the mind; äviçat - entered; acyutaù - the infallible.
When Narada, the chief of demigod sages had departed for His own äçrama, the
infallible Lord, who possesses infinite opulences, entered within the mind of the
brähmaëa sage, Çré Jagannätha Miçra.

tenähita mahat-tejo / dadhära samaye saté
etasminn antare sädhvé / çacé pati-paräyaëä 3
tena - by that; ähitam - conceived; mahat-tejaù - very powerful semen; dadhära
- bore; samaye - at the time; saté - chaste; etasmin - in that; antare - within;
sädhvé - the saintly lady; çacé - Çrématé Çacé Devé; pati-paräyaëä - dedicated to
her husband.

[p.46]
By virtue of the Lord's presence, in due course of time, the chaste and saintly Çacé
Devé conceived Jagannätha's powerful seed within her womb.

lebhe garbha harer aça / gaìgeva çämbhava çubhä
tasyäs tejo 'tivavdhe / çulka-pake yathä çaçé 4
lebhe - She got; garbham - pregnancy; hareù - of Lord Hari; açam - expansion;
gaìgä - the Gaìgä river; iva - like; çämbhavam - the potency of Çiva; çubhä blessed; tasyäù - of her; tejaù - potency; ativavdhe - grew; çukla-pake - in the
waxing moon; yathä - as; çaçé - the moon.
She became pregnant with the expansion of Çré Hari, as the blessed Gaìgä river
bore the potency of Çiva. Her luster increased day by day like the waxing moon.

tä dtvä rüpa-sampannä / tapta-cämékara-prabhäm
çriyä yukto jagannätho / mumude hta-mänasaù 5
täm - her; dtvä - having seen; rüpa-sampannäm - filled with beauty; taptacämékara - molten gold; prabhäm - the effulgence; çriyä - with opulence; yuktaù connected; jagannäthaù - Jagannätha Miçra; mumude - rejoiced; hta-mänasaù jubilant in heart.
When Jagannätha Miçra saw his wife becoming filled with great beauty and a
luster like molten gold, he felt blessed with much opulence, and his heart exulted.

atha tä tädçé dtvä / devä brahmädayo 'pare
gandharvä amarä ye ca / ye ca sendrä nabho gatäù 6
atha - then; tä - her; tädçém - in such a state; dtvä - having seen; deväù - the
demigods; brahmä-ädayaù - headed by Lord Brahmä; apare - others; gandharväù celestial musicians; amaräù - immortals; ye - who; ca - and; ye - who; ca - and;
sa-indräù - with Indra; nabha gatäù - taken to the skies.

[p.47]
Seeing Çacé in such an exalted state, the demigods headed by Brahmä and others
such as the gandharvas, the immortals, together with Indra took to the skies.

ktäïjali-puöo harät / säçru-kaëöha-vilocanäù
tuöuvur muditäù sarve / praëämänataù kandharäù 7
kta-aïjali-puöaù - with folded hands; harät - out of jubilation; sa-açru - with
tears; kaëöha - throat; vilocanäù - eyes; tuöuvuù - they offered praises; muditäù jubilant; sarve - all; praëäma - obeisances; anataù - bowed; kandharäù shoulders.
Tears filled their eyes and choked their throats out of jubilation, and with folded
hands and bowed heads, they offered these prayers all blissfully.

namämi tvä sadä garbhäm / aditi janané hareù
candrärkägni-prabhä-garbhäm / sattva-garbhä dhti kamäm 8
namämi - I bow down; tväm - to You; sadä - eternally; garbhäm - in your
pregnancy; aditim -Aditi; jananém - mother; hareù - of Lord Hari; candra - moon;
arka - sun; agni - fire; prabhä - luster; garbhäm - womb; sattva-garbhäm - pure
pregnancy; dhtim - maintenance; kamäm - patience.
"I bow down to you, O Adité, mother of Çré Hari. Your womb is effulgent like the
moon, sun and fire. By your pure and patient pregnancy, you maintain the Lord.

advea-garbhä sasiddhi / veda-garbhä svaya hareù
devaké rohiëé caiva / yaçodä sarvathä bhaväm 9
advea-garbhäm - your pregnancy is devoid of hate; sasiddhim - all perfections;
veda-garbhäm - the womb of the Vedas; svayam - in person; hareù - of Çré Hari;
rohiëém - Rohiëé; ca - and; eva - certainly; yaçodäm - Yaçodä; sarvathä - in His
every incarnation; bhaväm - becoming.

[p.48]
"Your pregnancy is free from envy and blessed with all perfection. Indeed yours is
the womb of the Vedas, and You personally give birth to Lord Hari in His every
incarnation, becoming Devaké, Rohiëé, and Yaçodä.

ta vai vibhari garbhe tva / yo yajïa prathayiyati
kértanäkhya mahä-puëya / yad yajïair nopapadyate 10
tam - that; vai - indeed; vibhari - You bear; garbhe - in your womb; tvam - you;
yaù - who; yajïam - sacrifice; prathayiyati - He makes famous; kértana-äkhyam describing in congregational chanting; mahä-puëyam - very purifying; yat which; yajïaiù - by fire sacrifices; na - not; upapadyate - obtained.
"In your womb You bear He who will spread the process of yajïa named
saìkértana. The saìkértana-yajïa has great purificatory potency unobtainable
through the Vedic process of yajïa.

kértana n-hareù çrutvä / nimiärdhena yä bhavet
prétir asmädça sa tu / koöi-yajïair bhaven na hi 11
kértanam - chanting; n-hareù - of the Lord in a human-like form; çrutvä - by
hearing; nimia-ardhena - by half a moment; yäù - they who; bhavet - can be;
prétiù - love; asmädçam - of such as ourselves; saù - he; tu - but; koöi-yajïaiù - by
millions of sacrifices; bhavet - can be; na - not; hi - indeed.
"If even persons such as ourselves hear but for a split-second such kértana of
Kåñëa's names as Lord Nåhari will bring, they can achieve love for Him. Such love is
unattainable even by the performance of millions of fire-yajïas.

aho mahya purä dattam / amta hariëä svayam
samudra manthana ktvä / tataù koöi-guëädhikam 12
aho - Oh!; mahyam - to me; purä - in ancient times; dattam - given; amtam nectar; hariëä - by Çré Hari; svayam - Himself; samudram - ocean; manthanam -

[p.49]
churning; ktvä - done; tataù - than that; koöi-guëa-adhikam - millions of times
better.
"Oh, how wonderful! In ancient times Çré Hari in His form of Mohiné-mürti,
personally awarded me amåta after we devas had churned the Garbhodaka ocean
with the asuras; yet this hari-nämämåta is a million times superior.

rasa päsyäma evätra / çëvantaù çré-harer yaçaù
mokam apy anta ceto / manyate kértanäd dhareù 13
rasam - the nectarean juice; päsyämaù - we shall drink; eva - certainly; atra here; çëvantaù - hearing; çré-hare - of Çré Hari; yaçaù - fame; mokam - liberation;
api - even; antam - false; cetaù - heart; manyate - they think; kértanät - by
chanting; hareù - of Çré Hari.
"Now through our ears we shall drink rasämåta as we hear the glories of Çré Hari.
In comparison with such kértana my heart considers even liberation insignificant."

evam uktvä tato deväù / sendrä jagmuù praëamya tä
brahmänam agrataù ktvä / gäyantaù çré-harer yaçaù 14
evam - thus; uktvä - speaking; tataù - then; deväù - the demigods; sa-indräù with Lord Indra; jagmuù - went; praëamya - having bowed down; täm - to her;
brahmänam - Lord Brahmä; agrataù - in front; ktvä - putting; gäyantaù - singing;
çré-hareù - of Çré Hari; yaçaù - fame.
After conversing in this manner, Indra with the devas offered respectful
obeisances to Çacé Devé. Then placing Brahmä at their head, they departed for their
own abodes singing the glories of Çré Hari.

svä puré çré-pater aço / jäto bhuvy ati-haritaù
kaler bhägya praçasanto / ntyantaù prema-vihvaläù 15

[p.50]
sväm - own; purém - city; çré-pateù - of the husband of the goddess of fortune;
açaù - expansion; jätaù - born; bhuvi - on the earth; ati-haritaù - very jubilant;
kaleù - of the age of quarrel; bhägyam - good fortune; praçasantaù - praising;
ntyantaù - dancing; prema-vihvaläù - overwhelmed with love.
Çrépati's expansion was about take birth on earth. Thus the gods jubilantly lauded
the goodfortune of the people of Kali-yuga and danced, overwhelmed by prema.

tataù pürëe niçä-näthe / niçéthe phälgune çubhe
käle sarva-guëotkare / çuddha-gandha-vahänvite 16
manasu deva-sädhünä / prasanneu ca çétale
svar-nadyäù çuddha-salile / jäte jätaù svaya hariù 17
tataù - then; pürëe - full; niçä-näthe - when the moon, lord of the night; niçéthe at night; phälgune - in the month of Phalguëa, approx. mid-February to midMarch; çubhe - at the auspicious; käle - at the time; sarva-guëa - all good
qualities; utkare - attracted; çuddha-gandha - pure fragrances; vaha - bearing;
anvite - possessed of; manasu - in the minds; deva-sädhünäm - of gods and saints;
prasanneu - peaceful; ca - and; çétale - cool; svaù-nadyäù - of the river which
flows through the sky; çuddha-salile - when the waters were clear; jäte - when it
happened; jätaù - born; svayam - by His own choice; hariù - the Lord Hari.
At the auspicious full moon night of the month of Phalguëa, when all virtuous
qualities of men were in attendance, and a breeze bearing pure fragrances blew,
when the minds of gods and godly men were tranquil, when the waters of the skyriver Gaìgä were crystal-clear, then did Çré Hari took birth by His own wish.

ta vikäçi-kamalekaëa lasat- / pürëa-candra-vadana kanakäbham
tejasä vitimirä diçäù svaya / kärayantam upalabhya suta saù 18
préti-sägara-rasasya na pära / präpa padma-nidhinä yathä 'dhanaù
çré-jagannätha-miçra-purandaraù / prema-gadgada-mukha sadä

[p.51]
dadhe 19
tam - Him; vikäçi-kamala - blossoming lotus flowers; ékaëam - eyes; lasat shining; pürëa-candra - full moon; vadanam - face; kanaka - golden; äbham effulgence; tejasä - by His potency; vitimirä - free from darkness; diçäù - all
sides; svayam - Himself; kärayantam - causing; upalabhya - observing; sutam son; saù - he; préti-sägara - ocean of love; rasasya - of mellows; na - not; päram limit; präpa - find; padma-nidhinä - by an unlimited treasure; yathä - as; adhanaù
- poor man; çré-jagannätha-miçra-purandaraù - Çré Jagannätha Miçra Purandara;
prema - love; gadgada - choking; mukham - mouth; sadä - always; dadhe - made.
Çré Jagannätha Miçra Purandara saw His son's eyes as blossoming lotus flowers,
His face like the effulgent full moon and His complexion like gold. By the child's
potency, darkness in all directions was dispelled. Jagannätha found no limit to the
mellifluous ocean of love he felt for his child. He felt just like a pauper finding a vast
treasure, and since his voice was choked with love he was unable to speak clearly.

tasya janma-samaye 'nu çaçäìka / rähur agrasad ala trapayaiva
këa-padma-vadanena nirjitaù / praviçat sura-ripor mukha vidhuù
20
tasya - His; janma-samaye - at the time of His birth; anu - following; çaçaaìkam - rabbit-marked (the moon;) rähuù - Rähu; agrasat - swallowed; alam enough; trapayä - with shame; eva - indeed; këa-padma-vadanena - by Çré
Kåñëa's lotus face; nirjitaù - defeated; praviçat - entered; sura-ripoù - of the
enemy of the gods; mukham - mouth; vidhuù - moon.
Just after the Lord's birth, Rähu impudently swallowed the moon, considering the
beauty of the moon had been utterly defeated by Çré Kåñëa's beautiful lotus face.
Thus while entering the mouth of that enemy of the gods, the moon appeared to
disappear.

tatra puëya-samaye manujänäm / kértana nara-hareù kta janaiù
püjana sapadi jähnavé-jale / snäna-dänam agha-märjana çucau 21

[p.52]
tatra - then; puëya-samaye - at the auspicious time; manujänäm - of men;
kértanam - chanting of the names of Hari; nara-hareù - for Hari in His
appearance like a human; ktam - done; janaiù - by the people; püjanam worship; sapadi - immediately; jähnavé-jale - in the waters of the Gaìgä; snäna bathing; dänam - penance; agha - sin; märjanam - cleansing; çucau - in the pure.
At that auspicious time, all people performed kértana of Narahari. With much
eagerness they offered worship, took bath, distributed charity, and bathed, cleansing
themselves from sin in holy waters of Jähnavé-Mä.

jahñuù sura-ganäù sa-mahendräù / padma-sambhava-maheçapurogäù
apsaräbhir atintya-paräbhir / näyakäç ca sumanäsi vavaruù 22
jahñuù - they rejoiced; sura-ganäù - the hosts of demigods; sa-mahendräù together with the great Indra; padma-sambhava - lotus-born Brahmä; mahä-éça Çiva, the great controller; purogäù - headed by; apsaräbhiù - with the celestial
dancing maidens; ati-ntya-paräbhiù - with great absorption in dancing; näyakäù leaders; ca - and; su-manäsi - great minds; vavaruù - showered abundant charity.
The hosts of suras headed by Indra as well as Brahmä and Çiva rejoiced and
apsaräs danced with sublime excellence, while on earth great-hearted social
dignitaries showered gifts of charity on deserving persons.

nélämbara-cakravarté / janmanä tasya haritaù
ajagämäçrama türëa / jämätuù sarva-çästra-vit 23
jagannätha samähüya / çacé sambodhayan sudhéù
dauhitra-janma-käla-jïa / ida vacanam abravét 24
nélämbara-cakravarté - the father of Çacé; janmanä - by His birth; tasya - His;
haritaù - joyous; ajagäma - went; äçramam - to the place of spiritual culture;

[p.53]
türëam - swiftly; jämätuù - of his son-in-law; sarva-çästra-vit - conversant with
all the scriptures; jagannätham - Jagannätha Miçra; samähüya - calling; çacém Çacé Devé; sambodhayan - informing; su-dhéù - highly intelligent man; dauhitra son of his daughter; janma-käla-jïa - knowing about the time of His birth; idam this; vacanam - statement; abravét - said.
Since he was aware of the auspicious time at which His daughter's son had taken
birth, Çré Nélämbara Cakravarté who was learned in all çästra, felt joyous on account
of the Lord's birth. Quickly he went to the äçrama of his son-in-law, and called for
Jagannätha Miçra and Çacé Devé. That very thoughtful gentleman said:

aye purua-siho 'ya / jätaù procce bhaspatau
asau sarvasya lokasya / pätä nitya bhaviyati 25
aye - Oh! purua-sihaù - lion among men; ayam - this person; jätaù - born;
procce - on the apex of the orbit; bhaspatau - Jupiter; asau - he; sarvasya - of all;
lokasya - people; pätä - protector; nityam - always; bhaviyati - He will be.
"O how astonishing! This child has taken birth just on the apex of the orbit of
Jupiter, the planet of Çré Guru. By this indication I understand that lion amongst
men shall give eternal protection to all people.

suçélaù sarva-dharmäëäm / äçrayo nyäsinä varaù
préti-daù sarva-bhutänä / pürëämta-karo yathä 26
suçélaù - having noble character; sarva-dharmäëäm - of all virtues; äçrayaù shelter; nyäsinäm - of renunciants; varaù - the best; préti-daù - a giver of love of
God; sarva-bhutänäm - for all living beings; purëämta-karaù - the full moon;
yathä - like.
"He possesses noble character. Indeed, His character is the original shelter of all
virtues. By becoming the topmost of all renunciates, He shall bestow love on all
living beings, just as the full moon floods the night sky with nectar.

samuddhartä sadaiväya / pit-mät-kula-dvayam

[p.54]
evam ukte dvije tasmin / sarve pramuditä janäù 27
samuddhartä - savior; sadä - always; eva - certainly; ayam - this; pit-mät - father
and mother; kula-dvayam - the two dynasties; evam - thus; ukte - having spoken;
dvije - the brähmaëa; tasmin - in that; sarve - all; pramuditäù - overjoyed; janäù the people.
"This person shall perpetually award deliverance to the dynasties of His father and
mother." Hearing the brähmaëa speak thus, all the people present became
overjoyed.

mätä harñam atéväpa / çrutvä tat pit-bhäitam
vätsyaç cakära putrasya / jäta-karma mahotsavam 28
mätä - His mother; harñam - happiness; atéva - intense; äpa - got; çrutvä having heard; tat - that; pit-bhäitam - words of her father; vätsyaù - His
affectionate father; cakära - performed; putrasya - of Her son; jäta-karma - birth
ceremony; mahotsavam - festival.
Hearing these words from her father, the child's mother felt very happy, and
Jagannätha Miçra, feeling much affection for his son, performed a great festival to
celebrate his birth.

tämbüla candana mälya / gandha prädät dvijätaye
krameëotthäna-karmädi-maìgaläni cakära saù 29
tämbülam - betel and chewing spices; candanam - sandalwood; mälyam garlands; gandham - scented oils; prädät - gave; dvijätaye - unto the brähmaëas;
krameëa - in course of time; utthäna-karma-ädi - the child's first standing and
other purificatory ceremonies; maìgaläni - auspicious; cakära - performed; saù He.
Then he distributed pän, sandal pulp, garlands, and scented oils to the brähmaëas.
As his son grew, he performed in natural sequence the various auspicious

[p.55]
ceremonies, at time of the boy's first standing up and so forth.

Thus ends the Fifth Sarga entitled "The Appearance of Çré Caitanya," in the
First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Sixth Sarga
kaumära-kréä-lélä
The Playful Pastimes of Çré Gauräìga's Childhood

tataù kälena kiyatä / jänu-caìkramaëa çiçoù
dtvä praharam äptau tau / dampaté kala-bhäiëaù 1
tataù - then; kälena - by time; kiyatä - by so much; jänu - knees; caìkramaëam crawling; çiçoù - of the child; dtvä - having seen; praharam - bliss; äptau - got;
tau - they two; dam-paté - wife and husband; kala - sweet; bhäiëaù - speech.
As time passed, the husband and wife delighted to see the child crawling on His
knees, and to hear the melodious sound of His prattle.

çoëa-padmäbha-vadane / dvija-räjasya raçmayaù
susmite bhänti sädhünä / mano-dhväntäpahäriëaù 2
çoëa-padma - red lotus; äbha - appearance; vadane - face; dvija-räjasya - of the
king amongst the twice-born; raçmayaù - rays; susmite - sweetly smiling; bhänti shine; sädhünäm - of the saints; manaù - mind; dhvänta - darkness; apahäriëaù taking away.
That monarch among the twice-born had a face resembling a red lotus. By the rays

[p.56]
beaming from His sweet smile, He dispelled all darkness from the minds of godly
men.

purä vibharty asau viçvam / iti cakre pitä svayam
çrémad-viçvambhara iti / näma tasya suçobhanam
purä - in ancient times; vibharti - He maintains; asau - He; viçvam - universe;
iti - thus; cakre - made; pitä - father; svayam - intuitively; çrémat-viçvambharaù maintainer of the universe; iti - thus; näma - name; tasya - His; suçobhanam very beautiful.
He is the maintainer of the universe since time immemorial. Thus His father
intuitively gave Him the very beautiful name, "Viçvambhara."

tapta-käïcana-gauräìgo / lasat-padmäyatekaëaù
prabhäïjanämbaro raupya-häré mälälako hariù 4
tapta-käïcana - molten gold; gaura-aìgaù - golden body; lasat - shining;
padma - lotus; äyata - spread; ékaëaù - eyes; prabhaïjana - scattered; ambaraù garments; raupya - the beauty; häré - attractive; mälä - clusters; alaka - curling
locks; hariù - the Lord who takes all evil far away.
Çré Viçvambhara Hari's body was dazzling like molten gold. His sparkling eyes
were wide-spread like the petals of a lotus. His garments were scattered and His
beauty all-attractive. Curly locks clustered round His face, and His presence
dispelled all inauspiciousness.

räkä-sudhäkara-mukha / kala-väg-amtänvitaù
madhuräktir ämukta-kaìkaëäìgada-bhüaëaù 5
räkä - night; sudhä-kara - nectar-maker, the moon; mukham - face; kala-väk sweet words; amta - nectarean; anvitaù - filled; madhura - sweet; aktiù appearance; ämukta - loose; kaìkaëa - bangles; aìgada - armbands; bhüaëaù -

[p.57]
decorations.
His face resembled the moon as it spreads nectar throughout the night, and His
charming speech also was nectarean. His appearance was thus altogether charming,
enhanced still further by His ornaments, loose bangles and arm-bands.

bhaìga-hiìgula-raktäbja-kara-päda-tala-çuciù
vavdhe kalayä nityam / çukla-pake iva dyu-räö 6
bhaìga-hiìgula - kuìkuma powder; rakta - reddish; abja - lotus; kara - hands;
päda - feet; tala - palms and soles; çuciù - gleaming; vavdhe - increased; kalayä by the phases; nityam - regularly; çukla-pake - in the waxing fortnight; iva - like;
dyu-räö - lord of the night (the moon).
The gleaming palms of His lotus hands and the soles of His lotus feet had the
ruddy hue of kuìkuma powder. Day by day, He grew swiftly like the moon, lord of
the night, in its waxing fortnight.

tataù kälena çoëäbhyäm / pädäbhyäm amita-dyutiù
aöana-viraha-ja täpa / medinyäù saìjahära saù 7
tataù - then; kälena - with time; çoëäbhyäm - by the reddish; pädäbhyäm - feet;
amita-dyutiù - limitless luster; aöana - walking; viraha-jam - born of separation;
täpam - suffering; medinyäù - of the earth; saìjahära - He withdrew; saù - He.
As time passed, that limitlessly lustrous Lord began to walk. Thus whenever He
withdraw from her surface his reddish soles, He made the earth goddess experience
pangs of separation.

tértha-bhramaëa-çélasya / dvijasyänna janärdanaù
bhuktvä ta smärayäm äsa / nanda-geha-kutühalam 8
tértha-bhramaëa - wandering to holy places; çélasya - whose practice; dvijasya of the brähmaëa; annam - rice; jana-ardanaù - who thrills the hearts of

[p.58]
mankind; bhuktvä - enjoyed; tam - Him; smärayäm äsa - reminded; nanda-geha of the house of King Nanda; kutühalam - festival.
Gaura Janärdana, who inspires the hearts of all men, thrice ate the rice cooked by a
brähmaëa who was wandering on pilgrimage. He then reminded that brähmaëa of
their previous association during the eternal festival within the house of Nanda
Mahäräja.

vayasyair bälakair särdha / viharas taru-palavaiù
ähatäù çiçavaù sarve / vicakruù purato mudä 9
vayasyaiù - with friends; bälakaiù - with the boys; särdham - together with;
viharan - sporting; taru-palavaiù - with the twigs of trees; ähatäù - struck;
çiçavaù - children; sarve - all; vicakruù - they contended in various ways; purata before; mudä - joyously.
As He played with other little boys of the same age, all the children would duel
with one another, using the twigs of trees for their weapons, and they derived much
joy from those games.

bhuvi tithan padaikena / jänunänyasya jänuka
pasparça markaöé lélä / kurvan mäyärbhako hariù 10
bhuvi - on the earth; tithan - standing; pada-ekena - on one foot; jänunä - with
the knee; anyasya - of another boy; jaëukam - knee; pasparça - He touched;
markaöém - monkey; lélä - play; kurvan - did; mäyä-arbhako - in the guise of a
boy; hariù - the dispeller of evil.
Çré Hari, in the guise of an ordinary boy, would sometimes imitate the antics of
monkeys. Standing with a single foot on the ground, He would touch the knee of
another boy with His own knee.

ekadä dhartum ätmänam / udyatä janané ruä
vékya kopa-paripürëo / bhäjanäni babhaïja saù 11

[p.59]
ekadä - once; dhartum - to arrest; ätmänam - Himself; udyatäm - attempting;
jananém - mother; ruä - in anger; vékya - having seen; kopa-paripürëaù overwhelmed with anger; bhäjanäni - pots; babhaïja - He broke; saù - He.
Once seeing that His mother was exasperated with Him and was attempt-ing to
restrain Him, Gaura Hari became filled with fury and broke all her clay pots.

purä bhagne ca bhäëòe 'ya / yaçodä-paçu-rajjubhiù
babandha vepitä tasya / bhayäd vékya mukha çacé 12
purä - formerly; bhagne - broken; ca - and; bhäëòe - pot; ayam - this; yaçodä Çrématé Yaçodä Devé; paçu-rajjubhiù - with the ropes for cows; babandha - she
bound; vepitä - trembling; tasya - of Him; bhayät - out of fear; vékya - seeing;
mukham - face; çacé - Çacé Devé.
In ancient times this same child also broke pots. At that time Yaçodä Mätä bound
Him with the ropes used for tying cows while BälaGopäla trembled fearfully. But at
present that same Yaçodä, appearing as Çacé, trembled in fear to see the wrathful
face of Viçvambhara.

upary upari vinyasta / tyakta-md-bhäëòa-sahatau
upaviçyäçucau deçe / mätur agre jahäsa saù 13
upari upari - on the very top; vinyasta - deposited; tyakta - abandoned; mt clay; bhäëòa - pots; sahatau - compacted; upaviçya - sitting down; açucau - in the
unclean; deçe - place; mätuù - of His mother; agre - in front; jahäsa - He laughed;
saù - He.
Then, climbing on the very top of the dump of abandoned and smashed clay
cooking pots, Gaura Hari sat down on that unclean spot in full view of His mother
and laughed at her.

ta dtvä sä çacé präha / tyaja täta jugupsitam

[p.60]
sthäna çuddha punaù snätvä / mamäìkärohaëa kuru 14
tam - Him; dtvä - seeing; sä - She; çacé - Çacé; präha - said; tyaja - give up; täta dear boy; jugupsitam - abominable; sthänam - place; çuddham - pure; punaù again; snätvä - having bathed; mama - my; aìka - lap; arohaëam - climbing; kuru
- do.
Seeing Him, Çacé said, "My dear boy, please leave that impure place. When You
have bathed and are again clean, come and sit on my lap."

evam ukte tu tä präha / bhagavän sarva-tattva-vit
dattätreyasya bhävaika-pürëaù sarva-jïa-pürakaù 15
evam - thus; ukte - having spoken; tu - indeed; täm - her; präha - He said;
bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sarva-tattva-vit - knower of all truths;
dattätreyasya - of Dattätreya; bhäva - mood; eka - only; pürëaù - filled; sarva all; jïa - wise men; pürakaù - filler.
After she had spoken thus, the all-opulent Personality of Godhead, who is
conversant with all truths, who gives wisdom to all wise men, spoke the philosophy
which had formerly been propounded by Dattätreya, the avadhüta sage.

çëu çucir açucir vä kalpanä-mätram etat / kiti-jala-pavanägnivyoma-vitta jagad dhi
vitata-vibhava-pürvädvaita-pädäbja eko / harir iha karuëäbdhir
bhäti nänyat pratéhi 16
çëu - hear; çuci - clean; açuci- unclean; vä - or; kalpanä-mätram - simply
imagination; etat - this; kiti - earth; jala - water; pavana - air; agni - fire; vyoma space; vittam - known; jagat - the cosmos; hi - indeed; vitata - expanded; vibhava
- manifested; pürva - formerly; advaita - nondifferentiated; päda-abja - lotus
foot; ekaù - one; hariù - the dispeller of evil; iha - in this world; karuëä - mercy;
abdhiù - ocean; bhäti - shines; na - not; anyat - other; pratéhi - have faith.

[p.61]
"Hear me! The concept of cleanliness or uncleanliness is simply imaginary. This
universe is known to be composed of earth, water, fire, air and space and there is
but one source, Çré Hari. From His non-dual lotus feet the universe was formerly
manifested and distributed. He is an ocean of mercy, and forever illuminates this
world. There is no one beyond Him. Just have faith in Lord Hari.

ataù pavitra eväsmi / näpavitraù kathaïcana
jänéhi mätar nänyä tva / çaìkä kartum ihärhasi 17
ataù - hence; pavitraù - pure; eva - certainly; asmi - I am; na - not; apavitraù impure; kathaïcana - at any time; jänéhi - just understand; mätaù - Mother; na not; anyäm - other; tvam - you; çaìkäm - anxiety; kartum - to do; iha - in this
regard; arhasi - You ought.
"Hence I am in a purified state and am not at any time contaminated. Just
understand this, Mother. You should have no further doubts in this matter."

evam ukte sute vä ta / kare saìghya satvarä
änéya snäpayäm äsa / svar-nadé-svaccha-väibhiù 18
evam - thus; ukte - having spoken; sute - the son; vä - indeed; tam - Him; kare by the hand; saìghya - grabbing; sa-tvarä - with speed; änéya - leading;
snäpayäm äsa - bathed; sva-nadé - of the river that flows from the spiritual
world, the Gaìgä; svaccha - crystalline; väibhiù -by the waters.
After her son had spoken in this way, Çacé Mätä clasped His hand, and leading Him
away, bathed Him in the crystal-clear waters of the sky-Gaìgä.

atha katipaye käle / mukta-md-bhäëòa-sahatau
upavita suta vékya / çacé vägbhir atäòayat 19
atha - then; katipaye käle - after some time; mukta - thrown out; mt-bhäëòa clay pots; sahatau - compacted; upavitam - seated; sutam - son; vékya - seeing;

[p.62]
çacé - Çacé; vägbhiù - with words; atäòayat - struck.
Then after a short time had passed, she again saw her son sitting on the heap of
clay cooking-pots, and she chastised Him:

apavitre niiddhe 'pi / sthäne tva manda-dhéù katham
tiöhaséti vacaù çrutvä / mätuù krodha-samanvitaù 20
çrémad-viçvambharaù präha / müòhe nästy açucir kvacit
ukta mayaitat pürva te / tat ki mä tva vigarhasi 21
apavitre - in the impure place; niiddhe - having been forbidden; api - although;
sthäne - in that place; tvam - You; manda-dhéù - stupid; katham - why?; tiöhasi You are staying; iti - thus; vacaù - statement; çrutvä - having heard; mätuù - from
His mother; krodha-samanvitaù - full of anger; çrémat-viçvambharaù - Çré
Viçvambhara; präha - said; müòhe - O foolish woman!; na asti - it is not; açuciù unclean; kvacit - in any way; uktam - said; mayä - by Me; etat - this; pürvam before; te - to you; tat - that; kim - why?; mäm - me; tvam - you; vigarhasi rebuke.
"You dull-brained boy! Why are You sitting in that contaminated place, although I
have already forbidden You to do so?" Hearing these words from His mother, Çré
Viçvambhara replied angrily, "O foolish woman! As I explained to you before, this
place is not in the least impure. So why do you scold Me?"

ity uktvä vadane tasyä / iöaka prähiëot ruä
tadäghätena vyathitä / mürcchitä nipapäta sä 22
iti - thus; uktvä - speaking; vadane - at the face; tasyäù - her; iöakam - brick;
prähiëot - threw; ruä - with anger; tadä - then; ghätena - by that blow; vyathitä agitated; mürcchitä - fainted; nipapäta - she fell; sä - she.
So saying He angrily threw a fragment of brick at her face. Becoming agitated on

[p.63]
account of that blow, Çacé Mätä fainted and tumbled to the ground.

tadä sarväù samägatya / striyas tä çétalair jalaiù
siñicuù sma tadä tatra / harir mänuya-karma-kt 23
ägatya prarurodäçu / mätar mätar iti svayam
çré-hasta tan-mukhe nyasya / sarva-duùkhäpahärakam 24
tadä - then; sarväù - all; samägatya - coming together; striyaù - women; tä her; çétalaiù - cool; jalaiù - with water; siñicuù - they sprinkled; sma - did; tadä then; tatra - there; hariù - the remover of sin; mänuya-karma-kt - doing the
actions of a man; ägatya - coming; praruroda - cried loudly; äçu - quickly; mätaù
mätaù - Mother! Mother!; iti - thus; svayam - impulsively; çré-hastam - graceful
hand; tat-mukhe - on her face; nyasya - placing; sarva-duùkha - all sorrows;
apahärakam - taker away.
Then all the women came there and sprinkled Çacé with cool water. and Çré Hari,
enacting the role of a human child, quickly came to her loudly crying, "Mätä! Mätä!"
Affectionately He placed His graceful hand upon her face and thus alleviated all pain
from her heart.

tataù prabuddhä sä sadyaù / kroe ktvä suta çacé
mumoda vatsalätéva / putra-snehätivihvalä 25
tataù - thereafter; prabuddhä - conscious; sä - she; sadyaù - suddenly; kroe - on
her lap; ktvä - did; sutam - son; çacé - Çacé; mumoda - took pleasure; vatsalä maternal; atéva - intense; putra-sneha - affection for her son; ati-vihvalä - very
much overwhelmed.
At that Çacé Devé suddenly became fully conscious, and taking her son on her lap
she became filled with intense maternal affection and delighted in Him, oblivious to
all else.

[p.64]
tato jagad-guru präha / käcid dharña-paräyaëä
parihäsa-parä mätre / närikela-phala-dvayam 26
samänéya prayacchäsyai / tadä susthä bhaviyati
na cet mariyati tadä / kim upäya kariyasi 27
tataù - then; jagat-gurum - to the spiritual master of the universe; präha - said;
käcit - some lady; harña-paräyaëä - given to bliss; parihäsa - joking; parä absorbed; mätre - to His mother; närikela - coconut; phala-dvayam - two fruits;
samänéya - collect; prayaccha - give; asyai - to her; tadä - then; susthä - well;
bhaviyati - she will be; na - not; cet - if; mariyati - she will die; tadä - then; kim what; upäyam - means; kariyasi - You will do.
Then one light-hearted lady said jokingly to the spiritual master of the cosmos, "If
You can pick two coconuts and give them to Your mother, then she will be well.
Otherwise she will die. But how can a little boy like You do this?!"

iti kasyä vacaù çrutvä / mätur aìkät tvaränvitaù
nirgaty änéya sa dadau / närikela-phala-dvayam 28
iti - thus; kasyäù - of that lady; vacaù - words; çrutvä - hearing; mätuù - of His
mother; aìkät - from her lap; tvara - speed; anvitaù - full of; nirgati - went; änéya
- bringing; saù - He; dadau - gave; närikela-phala-dvayam - two coconuts.
At hearing these words from the lady, Gaura Hari speedily scrambled down from
His mother's lap and went out of the house. Immediately He returned bearing two
coconuts, and gave them to Çacé Mätä.

tat-käla-pätanäd ambu-yukta-vnta-yuga hariù
tad dtvä vismitäù procuù / kutaù präpta tvayä katham 29
tat-käla - that very moment; pätanät - cut down; ambu-yukta - filled with
water; vnta - with leaf and stem; yugam - pair; hariù - Lord Hari; tat - that; dtvä -

[p.65]
having seen; vismitäù - amazed; procuù - said; kutaù - where; präptam - got;
tvayä - by You; katham - how.
The two coconuts had clearly been felled that very moment together with leaf and
stem. Seeing this, the ladies were amazed and inquired of the boy, "Oh! Where did
You get them and how?"

tato huìktibhiù sarvä / värayitvä mahä-manäù
vatsa-gotra-dhvajo mätre / dadau smera-mukhämbujam 30
tataù - then; huìktibhiù - with His loud crying; sarväh - all the ladies; värayitvä
- preventing; mahä-manäù - great mind; vatsa - calf; gotra-dhvajaù - flag of His
dynasty; mätre - to His mother; dadau - presented; smera - cupid; mukha -face;
ambu-jam - born from the water (a lotus).
Then the very clever Viçvambhara, whose ancestral flag bears a calf, with loud
cries baffled the curious ladies' questions and presented to His mother His smiling
face, which resembles the blossoming lotus.

athänyac chëu véryäëi / viciträëi mahätmanaù
lokottaräëi sädhüni / mäyinaù paramätmanaù 31
atha - then; anyat - other; çëu - hear; véryäëi - potent; viciträëi - wonderful;
mahätmanaù - of the magnanimous; loka-uttaräëi - superhuman; sädhüni virtuous; mäyinaù - of the mystic; parama-ätmanaù - of the Supersoul.
Now please hear further of the potent, astonishing, superhuman and virtuous
activities of the magnanimous Lord. He is is the supreme mystic who expands
Himself as the all-pervasive Supersoul.

rätrau kadäcit sasuptä / çacé pürëa janair iva
paramälakya savignä / kroa-stha sva-suta çacé 32

[p.66]
çaìkitä preayäm äsa / pati-gehe tvaränvitä
püjita pathi devaiç ca / çrémad-viçvambhara harim 33
rätrau - at night; kadäcit - once; sasuptä - soundly asleep; çacé - Çacé Devé;
pürëam - filled; janaiù - with people; iva - as if; parama - of a high nature; älakya
- slightly visible; savignä - perturbed; kroa-stham - situated in her lap; sva-sutam her own son; çacé - Çacé Devé; çaìkitä - anxious; preayäm äsa - she sent; pati-gehe
- to the room of her husband; tvara-anvitä - speedily; püjitam - worshipped;
pathi - on the way; devaiù - by the demigods; ca - and; çrémat-viçvambharam - Çré
Viçvambhara; harim - the remover of sin.
Once, while Çacé Devé was resting, she saw that her home was apparently filled
with people of a very exalted nature, who were only slightly visible. Being much
perturbed and anxious for her son who was lying in her lap, she hastily sent Him to
her husband's room. On the way, Çré Viçvambhara Hari was offered worship by the
demigods.

pathi prayätasya sutasya pädayoù / suriktayor nüpura-nisvana
muhuù
çrutvä sa-çaìkaù kim ida kutaù svana / vätsyaù çacé präha çacé ca
vätsyam 34
pathi - on the path; prayätasya - of He who was going; sutasya - of her son;
pädayoù - of His two feet; su-riktayoù - very clearly; nüpura - ankle bells;
nisvanam - sound; muhuù - repeatedly; çrutvä - having heard; sa-çaìkaù - with
anxiety; kim - what?; idam - this; kutaù - whence?; svanam - sound; vätsyaù father; çacém - to Çacé; präha - said; çacé - Çacé; ca - and; vätsyam - to the father.
While their son was walking through the courtyard, His parents heard very
distinctly the sound of anklebells ringing on His feet, although He was not been
wearing any. Confused, Jagannätha and Çacé asked one another, "What is that?
Where is that sound coming from?"

[p.67]
gate samépa tanaye 'ti-vismito / dtvä surikta suta-päda-paìkajam
kutaù çruta nüpura-maìgala-svana / suta samäliìgya muda yayau
dvijaù 35
gate - gone; samépam - nearby; tanaye - to His son; ati-vismitaù - very
mystified; dtvä - having seen; su-riktam - very clearly; suta-päda - the feet of His
son; paìka-jam - lotus; kutaù - whence?; çrutam - heard; nüpura - ankle bells;
maìgala-svanam - auspicious sound; sutam - son; samäliìgya - warmly
embracing; mudam - joyously; yayau - went; dvijaù - the brähmaëa.
When Jagannätha came in front of his son, he was even more mystified, for he saw
very clearly that His lotus feet were without anklebells as before. He wondered,
"Whence did that melodious sound of anklebells come?" With great affection the
brähmaëa warmly embraced His son and thereby tasted transcendental bliss.

Thus ends the Sixth Sarga entitled "The Playful Pastimes of Çré Gauräìga's
Childhood," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Seventh Sarga
bälya-kréä-lélä
Lord Viçvambhara's Boyhood Pastimes

iti çrutvä hareù päda-paìkaja-dhyäna-nirvtaù
dämodaraù paryapcchad / dharer jyethasya sat-kathäm 1
iti - thus; çrutvä - having heard; hareù - of Hari; päda - foot; paìkaja - lotus;
dhyäna - meditation; nirvtaù - delighted; dämodaraù - Çré Dämodara;
paryapcchat - inquired; hareù - of Hari; jyethasya - of the older brother; sat-

[p.68]
kathäm - pure topics.
Hearing this, Dämodara Paëita, who was feeling great delight as he meditated on
these pastimes of Çré Hari's lotus feet, requested to hear the story of the Çré Hari's
older brother, saying:

kathayasva mahat-khyätam / viçvarüpasya tattvataù
tac chrutvä präha bho brahman / çrüyatä kathayämi te 2
kathayasva - tell; mahat-khyätam - great narration; viçvarüpasya - of Çré
Viçvarüpa; tattvataù - factually; tat - that; çrutvä - having heard; präha - He said;
bhoù - good!; brahman - O brähmaëa; çrüyatä - hear me; kathayämi - I shall
describe; te - to you.
"Please narrate factually the celebrated story of Viçvarüpa." Muräri replied, "So be
it, O brähmaëa. Now listen carefully, as I relate it to you."

ity uktvä vaktum ärebhe / vaidyo hdyä kathä çubhäm
baladeväçakasyäpi / viçvarüpasya pävaném 3
iti - thus; uktvä - having spoken; vaktum - to speak; ärebhe - began; vaidyaù physician; hdyam - heart-warming; kathäm - story; çubhäm - auspicious;
baladeva - Lord Baladeva; açakasya - of the expansion; api - indeed; viçvarüpasya
- of Viçvarüpa; pävaném - purifying.
So saying, the physician then began to tell the glorious and pleasing history of
Viçvarüpa, who was actually a direct expansion of Çré Baladeva.

çrémat-çré-viçvarüpaù sakala-guëa-nidhiù oòaçäbdo 'ti-çuddhaù
präpäcäryatvam ätma-çravaëa-mananataù çakta-dhéù prema-bhaktaù

sarva-jïaù sarvadäsau nara-hari-caraëäsakta-citto 'ti-höaù
çäntaù santoa-yukto jagati na ratimän veda-vettä rasa-jïaù 4

çrémat-çré-viçvarüpaù - Çri Viçvarüpa; sakala - all; guëa - qualities; nidhiù -

[p.69]
ocean; oòaça-abdaù - sixteen years; ati-çuddhaù - very pure; präpa - he attained;
äcäryatvam - quality of a teacher by example; ätma - the Lord; çravaëa - hearing;
mananataù - by thinking; çakta-dhéù - powerful intellect; prema-bhaktaù - a
devotee in pure love for Kåñëa; sarva-jïaù - all-cognizant; sarvadä - at all times;
asau - he; nara-hari - Çré Hari in His humanlike feature; caraëa - feet; äsakta attached; cittaù - mind; ati-höaù - very blissful; santoa-yuktaù - satisfied; jagati in the material world; na - not; ratimän - attached; veda-vettä - conversant with
the Vedic wisdom; rasa-jïaù - conversant with mellows.
Çré Viçvarüpa was an ocean of good qualities. At the age of sixteen, through
following the path of hearing about and contemplating the Lord's name, form,
paraphernalia, entourage and pastimes, that very pure soul had achieved the
qualification of äcärya, a teacher by example. He possessed very powerful
intelligence, and His qualities were exemplary of one matured in love for Kåñëa. He
was all-knowing, and His mind was at all times attached to the feet of Narahari.
Hence he was very jubilant, peaceful and fully satisfied. He was unattached to the
material world, and was conversant with the Vedic wisdom and rasa-tattva, the
science of transcenden-tal relationships.

janako vijane vicintya tat / tanayasyodvahanocitä vadhüm
manasä paricintayan svaya / bubudhe tat sakala dvijätmajaù 5
janakaù - His father; vijane - in solitude; vicintya - thinking; tat - that;
tanayasya - of his son; udvahana - marriage; ucitäm - suitable; vadhüm - bride;
manasä - in his mind; paricintayan - pondering fully; svayam - himself; bubudhe knew; tat - that; sakalam - all; dvija-ätmajaù - the son of the brähmaëa.
When his father was alone, he would consider the selection of a suitable bride for
his son. Over and over he pondered over this question. The brähmaëa's son knew
full well about this.

sa viçvarüpaù pitur ittham antaç / ceöä viditvä sakala titikuù
tyaktvä gha svarga-nadé pratérya / jagräha sannyäsam açakyam
anyaiù 6

[p.70]
saù - He; viçvarüpaù - Çré Viçvarüpa; pituù - of his father; ittham - thus; antaceöäm - thoughts; viditvä - knowing; sakalam - all; titikuù - forebearing; tyaktvä gave up; gham - home; svarga-nadém - the celestial river; pratérya - crossing;
jagräha - took; sannyäsam - renounced order; açakyam - impossible; anyaiù - by
others.
Forebearing Viçvarüpa knew everything of His father's thoughts. Therefore
desiring to remain within the association of sädhus, He gave up his home, crossed
the Gaìgä and accepted the order of sannyäsa, which is difficult for others.

tataù pitä pariçrutya vihvalo / mätä ca sädhvé vilaläpa duùkhitä
täv ähatuù putra-hitau suto me / sannyäsa-dharma-nirato bhavatv
iti 7
tataù - then; pitä - his father; pariçrutya - hearing; vihvalaù - delirious; mätä mother; ca - and; sädhvé - saintly lady; vilaläpa - lamented; duùkhitä - unhappy;
tau - they two; ähatuù - they said; putra-hitau - well-wishers of their son; sutaù son; me - my; sannyäsa-dharma - renounced order; nirataù - attached; bhavatu let it be; iti - thus.
When His father heard of this he became delirious, and His saintly mother
lamented very woefully. However, as well-wishers of their son, they nobly said,
"Our son is attached to the renounced order. So be it."

ity äçiantau tanayäya datvä / muni-vratau dhairyam uvähatuù sma
viädam utsjya suta jagat-pati / kroòe nidhäyäçu muda tadäpatuù 8
iti - thus; äçiantau - offering blessings; tanayäya - for their son; datvä - gave;
muni-vratau - taken the vows of sages; dhairyam - forebearance; uvähatuù - they
accepted; sma - did; viädam - lamentation; utsjya - giving up; sutam - son; jagatpatim - master of the universe; kroòe - on their laps; nidhäya - placing; äçu quickly; mudam - bliss; tadä - then; äpatuù - got.

[p.71]
Thus offering blessings for the welfare of their elder son, they themselves took the
vow of sages by practicing forebearance, and thereby abandoned their lamentation.
Then they placed their remaining son, the shelter of the universe, upon their laps
and at once tasted bliss.

tato hariù präha pitar gato me / bhrätä bhavanta parihäya düram
mayaiva käryo bhavataç ca sevä / mätuç ca nitya sukham äpnuhi
tvam 9
tataù - then; hariù - Çré Haré; präha - said; pitaù - O Father!; gataù - gone; me my; bhrätä - brother; bhavantam - your honor; parihäya - giving up; düram - far
away; mayä - by Me; eva - surely; käryaù - duty; bhavataù - of your honor; ca and; sevä - service; mätuù - of Mother; ca - and; nityam - always; sukham happiness; äpnuhi - you should have; tvam - you.
Then Gaura Hari spoke, "Pitäjé, My brother has departed for distant countries, and
given up your service. I will surely serve you and Mätä. May you always be happy."

ittha niçamya sva-sutasya väkyam / alpa-gambhéra-manojïam
arthavat
äliìgya ta haraja-netra-väribhir / aväpa moda janané pitä ca 10
ittham - thus; niçamya - hearing; sva-sutasya - of their son; väkyam - words;
alpa-gambhéra - not very deep; mana-jïam - charming to the mind; arthavat - yet
meaningful; äliìgya - embracing; tam - Him; hara-ja - born of joy; netra-väribhiù
- with tears; aväpa - got; modam - pleasure; janané - mother; pitä - father; ca and.
As they heard the words of their son, which were not trivial but profound, meaningful and charming, the father and mother became happy, and they embraced Him
with tears of joy in their eyes.

tad-aìga-sasparça-rasäbhitpta- / gäträëi närdrä vidur aïjasäparam

[p.72]
gatäù sva-yogena yathä suyoginaù / paçyanti nema na para ca
lokam 11
tat - His; aìga - body; sasparça - close touch; rasa - mellow; abhitpta contented; gäträëi - bodies; na - not; ärdräù - softened; viduù - they knew;
aïjasä - for the instant; aparam - else; gatäù - gone; sva-yogena - by connecting
with their own son; yathä - as; su-yoginaù - expert in yoga; paçyanti - they see;
na - not; imam - this; na - not; param - next; ca - and; lokam - world.
Their limbs were made content by the intimate touch of His body. Their hearts
became melted and for that instant they knew nothing else, in the same way that
accomplished yogés attain trance and consider neither this world nor the next.

paöhan pituù sevana-yukta-cetäh / kréòäparo bälaka-saìga-madhye
kréòan vayasyaiù kila dhüli-dhüsaro / na veda kiïcit kudito 'pi
bhojanam 12
paöhan - studying; pituù - of his father; sevana-yukta-cetäù - mind absorbed in
service; kréòä-paraù - absorbed in play; bälaka - boys; saìga-madhye - in the
midst of His association; kréòan - playing; vayasyaiù - with His playmates; kila indeed; dhüli-dhüsaraù - grey with dust; na - not; veda - knew; kiïcit - anything;
kuditaù - hungry; api - although; bhojanam - food.
Then Viçvambhara studied with a mind to serve His father, but at times He
became absorbed in play in the midst of other boys. While so engaged, His body
became grey from the dust and He became oblivious to all else, including food,
although He was hungry.

kadäcid älokya pitä svatantra / sabhartsayäm äsa suta hitärthé
paöhädika caiva vihäya sarva / kudärditaù kréòasi bälakair vtaù 13
kadäcit - once; älokya - seeing; pitä - father; sva-tantram - independent;
sabhartsayäm äsa- rebuked; sutam - son; hita-arthé - desiring His benefit; paöha-

[p.73]
ädikam - study and so on; ca - and; eva - certainly; vihäya - giving up; sarvam all; kudä - hunger; arditaù - afflicted; kréòasi - you play; bälakaiù - with boys;
vtaù - surrounded.
Once when His father observed the independent Supreme Lord in that condition,
he chastised the boy, desiring His welfare, "Why have You abandoned Your study
and all other duties in order to play in the midst of boys while tormented by
hunger?"

tato räjanyä çayanävasäne / svapne 'vadat ta dvija-varya-mukhyaù
na ki suta tva bahu manyase hi ki / vä paçuù sparça-maëiù na vetti
14
tataù - then; räjanyäm - at night; çayana - sleeping; avasäne - at the end;
svapne - in a dream; avadat - said; tam - to him; dvija - the brähmaëa; varya best; mukhyaù - chief; na - not; kim - what?; sutam - son; tvam - you; bahu much; manyase - you think; hi - indeed; kim vä - whether; paçuù - animal; sparçamaëiù - touch stone; na - not; vetti - he knows.
That night towards the end of His rest, a noble brähmaëa spoke to him in a dream,
"Why do you think so little of your son? You are just like an animal who thinks
nothing of a touchstone.

ratnäçukälaìkta-deha-yaöiù / ki vä na cäçnäti tad-açukäni
tam äha miçro hy akuto bhayaù svaya / näräyaëaç ced bhavatéha
putraù 15
ratna - jewels; açuka - silken cloth; alaìkta - decorated; deha-yaöiù - the body
frame; kim - what; vä - or; na - not; ca - and; açnäti - he eat; tat-açukäni - those
garments; tam - him; äha - said; miçraù - Jagannätha Miçra; hi - indeed; akutaù in the least; bhayaù - fear; svayam - Himself; näräyaëaù - Lord Näräyaëa; cet - if;
bhavati - he is; iha - in this world; putraù - son.

[p.74]
"Such an animal, if his body is decorated with a silken garment embroidered with
jewels, will he not chew the garment?" The Miçra fearlessly answered the brähmaëa,
"Even though Gaura may be Näräyaëa Himself, still in this life He is my son.

tathäpi tat täòanam eva dharma / ity ukto vipro 'pi tam äha sädhu
ity evam uktvä prayayau dvijägryo / vätsyaù prabuddhaù punar
äçaçasa 16
tathäpi - still; tat - that; täòanam - chastisement; eva - certainly; dharmaù religious duty; iti - thus; uktaù - addressed; vipraù - the learned brähmaëa; api and; tam - him; äha - he said; sädhu - you are a good man; iti - thus; evam - thus;
uktvä - having said; prayayau - he went forth; dvija-agryaù - best of brähmaëas;
vätsyaù - affectionate father; prabuddhaù - enlightened; punaù - again and again;
äçaçasa - he described.
"And thus it is my assured dharma to chastise Him." At this the vipra replied,
"Very good!" and then he departed. The affectionate father, feeling much
enlightened, described the dream many times over.

svapna niçamyäçu janäù prahtä / viçvambhara purua-varyasattamam
ta menire pürëa-mano-ratha mudä / mene pitä sva janané ca tutä 17
svapnam - dream; niçamya - hearing; äçu - quickly; janäù - the people; prahtä jubilant; viçvambharam - Çré Viçvambhara; purua - personality; varya - best;
sattamam - excellent; tam - Him; menire - they considered; pürëa - full; manaratham - chariot of the mind (desire); mudä - happily; mene - he thought; pitä father; svam - own son; janané - mother; ca - and; tutä - satisfied.
When the people of Navadvépa heard of this dream, they jubilantly thought that
Viçvambhara must be a very unique and exalted personality who had come just to
fulfill their every desire. But the father and mother were content just to think of
Him as their son.

[p.75]
tataù kadäcin nivasan sva-mandire / samudyad äditya-karätilohitaù
sva-tejasä-pürita-deha ävabhau / uväca mätar vacana kuruva me 18
tataù - then; kadäcit - once; nivasan - dwelling; sva-mandire - in His own
home; samudyat - rising; äditya-kara - sun; ati-lohitaù - very red; sva-tejasä - by
His own power; pürita - filled; dehaù - body; ävabhau - shone; uväca - He said;
mätaù - mother; vacanam - statement; kuruva - do; me - My.
Once while dwelling in their home, suddenly the son of Çacé stood up, displaying a
brilliant red luster like the rising sun. As His entire body shone with His potency,
He commanded, "Mother, do as I bid you!"

tathä jvalanta sva-suta sva-tejasä / vilokya bhétä tam uväca vismitä
yad ucyate täta karomi tat tvayä / vadasva yat te manasi sthita
svayam 19
tathä - thus; jvalantam - shining brilliantly; sva-sutam - own son; sva-tejasä with His own potency; vilokya - seeing; bhétä - afraid; tam - to Him; uväca - said;
vismitä - mystified; yat - what; ucyate - is said; täta - dear son; karomi - I shall
do; tat - that; tvayä - by You; vadasva - say; yat - what; te - Your; manasi - in the
mind; sthitam - situated; svayam - Yourself.
Glancing timidly at her son who had become so dazzling with power, she felt
mystified and replied, "Dear son, whatever You say, I shall do! Come, tell me what
is on Your mind."

tad ittham äkarëya vaco 'mta punas / tä präha mätar na hares
tithau tvayä
bhoktavyam äkarëya vacaù sutasya sä / tatheti ktvä jaghe prahtavat
20
tat - that; ittham - thus; äkarëya - hearing; vacaù - words; amtam - immortal;

[p.76]
punaù - again; täm - to her; präha - said; mätaù - mother; na - not; hareù - of
Hari; tithau - on the holy day; tvayä - by you; bhoktavyam - should be eaten;
äkarëya - hearing; vacaù - statement; sutasya - of her son; sä - she; tathä iti - so
be it; ktvä - made; jaghe - accepted; prahtavat - joyfully.
Hearing this, He replied with His nectarean voice , "Mätä, henceforward on the
holy day of Hari, Çré Ekädaçé, you must fast." Hearing her son's order, Çacé accepted
it enthusiastically, saying, "So be it!"

nivedita püga-phalädika yat / dvijena bhuktvä punar abravét täm
vrajämi deha paripälayasva / sutasya niçceöa-gata kaëärdham 21
niveditam - offering; püga-phala-ädikam - betel fruits etc.; yat - which; dvijena by the brähmaëa; bhuktvä - eaten; punaù - again; abravét - said; täm - her;
vrajämi - I am going; deham - body; paripälayasva - take great care; sutasya - of
your son; niçceöa-gatam - inattentive; kaëa-ardham - a split second.
Once after Nimäi had eaten an offering of betel nut and chewing spices, presented
by a visiting brähmaëa, the brähmaëa said to Çacé Mätä, "Now I am departing.
Kindly take great care for the body of your son; do not be inattentive for even half a
moment."

ity uktvä sahasotthäya / daëòavac cäpatad bhuvi
viçvambhara gata dtvä / mätä duùkha-samanvitä 22
iti uktvä - so saying; sahasä - suddenly; utthäya - rising; daëòavat - like a stick;
ca - and; apatat - He fell; bhuvi - on the earth; viçvambharam - Çré Viçvambhara;
gatam - state; dtvä - having seen; mätä - mother; duùkha-samanvitä - filled with
grief.
Just after the brähmaëa had thus spoken, Gaura abruptly stood up and swooned,
falling like a rod to the ground. Seeing Viçvambhara's condition, His mother became
stricken with anxiety.

[p.77]
snäpayäm äsa gaìgeyais / toyair ämta-kalpakaiù
tataù prabuddhaù sustho 'sau / bhütvä sa nyavasat sukhé 23
tejasä sahajenaiva / tac chrutvä vismito 'bhavat
jagannätho 'bravéc cainä / daivé mäyä na vidmahe 24
snäpayäm äsa - she bathed; gaìgeyaiù - with the Gaìgä's; toyaiù - with the
waters; ämta-kalpakaiù - like nectar; tataù - then; prabuddhaù - conscious; susthaù - well-being; asau - He; bhütvä - became; saù - He; nyavasat - dwelt; sukhé in happiness; tejasä - at the vigor; sahajena - naturally; eva - indeed; tat - that;
çrutvä - hearing; vismitaù - astonished; abhavat - he was; jagannäthaù Jagannätha Miçra; abravét - he said; ca - and; enam - her; daivém - divine; mäyäm illusory energy; na - not; vidmahe - we can understand.
She bathed him with the waters of the Gaìgä, which are equal to immortal nectar.
Then He awoke, restored to well being and happily continued His life with natural
vigor as before. Jagannätha Miçra became astonished to hear of this event, and he
exclaimed to his wife, "Certainly we cannot comprehend the power of the Lord's
illusory energy!"

iti çrutvä kathä divyäm / präha dämodara-dvijaù
kim ida kathita bhadra / svaya këo jagad-guruù 25
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; kathäm - His story; divyäm - divine; präha - he said;
dämodara-dvijaù - the brähmaëa, Dämodara; kim - what; idam - this; kathitam described; bhadra - O blessed sir; svayam - Himself; këaù - Lord Kåñëa; jagatguruù - spiritual master of the universe.
Upon hearing this divine narration from Muräri Gupta, the brähmaëa Dämodara
Paëita said, "Blessed sir, what is this tale which you have narrated? Lord Çré Kåñëa,
the spiritual master of this cosmic manifestation has by His free will taken birth as
Viçvambhara.

[p.78]
jätaù katha vrajäméti / pälayasva suta çubhe
iti mätre katha präha / hy etan me saçayo mahän 26
jätaù - born; katham - how; vrajämi - I shall go; iti - thus; pälayasva - protect;
sutam - son; çubhe - O blessed lady; iti - thus; mätre - unto the mother; katham how; präha - he said; hi - indeed; etat - this; me - my; saçayaù - doubt; mahän great.
"Why then did the brähmaëa say to Çäcé Mä, I shall go now. Therefore take care for
your son, dear lady.' For what reason did he speak thus? I am much confused at this.

ki mäyä jagadéçasya / tad vaktu tvam ihärhasi
hareç caritram evätra / hitäya jagatä bhavet 27
kim - what; mäyä - illusory potency; jagat-éçasya - of the Lord of the universe;
tat - that; vaktum - to speak; tvam - you; iha - now; arhasi - you ought; hareù - of
Lord Hari; caritram - life history; eva - surely; atra - now; hitäya - for the
welfare; jagatäm - of the people; bhavet - it can be.
"For how can the Lord's illusory energy affect the Lord? Kindly speak of this. And
may this history of Çré Hari bring benefit to all the people of the world!"

Thus ends the Seventh Sarga entitled "Lord Viçvambhara's Boyhood
Pastimes," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eighth Sarga
jagannätha-miçra-sasiddhi
Jagannätha Miçra Attains the Highest Perfection

[p.79]
iti çrutvä vacas tasya / cintayitvä vicärya ca
natvä hari punaù präha / çëuva susamähitaù 1
iti - thus; çrutvä - having heard; vacaù - words; tasya - his; cintayitvä considering; vicärya - pondering; ca - and; natvä - bowed; harim - the remover
of sin; punaù - again; präha - he said; çëuva - listen; su-samähita - very
attentively.
Hearing Dämodara's words, Muräri considered and pondered over them. Then first
bowing to Çré Hari, he spoke as follows, "Please hear me with rapt atten-tion."

janasya bhagavad-dhyänät / kértanät çravaëäd api
hareù praveço hdaye / jäyate sumahätmanaù 2
janasya - of a person; bhagavat - on the Supreme Lord; dhyänät - by
meditation; kértanät - by chanting; çravaëät - by hearing; api - also; hareù - of
Lord Hari; praveçaù - entrance; hdaye - in the heart; jäyate - born; su-mahäätmanaù - of a great soul.
When a very pure soul meditates on Çré Hari, or speaks and hears about Him, the
Lord thereby enters and arises within his heart.

tasyänukära cakre sa / tat-tejas tat-paräkramam
dadhäti puruo nityam / ätma-dehädi-vismtaù 3
tasya - for that person; anukäram - following; cakre - practices; saù - He; tat His; tejaù - power; tat - His; paräkramam - prowess; dadhäti - He bestows;
puruaù - the Lord; nityam - eternal; ätma-deha-ädi - mind, body and so on;
vismtaù - forgetfulness.
The Lord creates a semblance of Himself in the bhakta, endowing him with His
own eternal potencies and prowess, and thus the bhakta forever forgets all

[p.80]
identification with his material mind, body, and related attachments.

bhaved eva tataù käle / punar bähyo bhavet tataù
karoti sahaja karma / prahlädasya yathä purä 4
bhavet - he becomes; evam - thus; tataù - thus; käle - in time; punaù - further;
bähyaù - external; bhavet - he becomes; tataù - than that; karoti - he does;
sahajam - naturally; karma - action; pra-hlädasya - of the very joyous one
(Prahläda Mahäräja); yathä - as; purä - in ancient times.
With the passage of time, as he becomes more and more aloof from externals, at
last he performs his bodily functions spontaneously, as did the enduringly jubilant
devotee, Prahläda Mahäräja, in ancient times.

tädätmyo 'bhüt toya-nidhau / punar deha-smtis taöe
eva hi gopa-sädhvénä / tädätmya sambhavet kvacit 5
tädätmyaù - the one nature; abhüt - it was; toya-nidhau - in the ocean; punaù again; deha-smtiù - remembrance of the body; taöe - on the shore; evam - thus; hi
- indeed; gopa-sädhvénäm - to the saintly wives of the cowherd men; tät-ätmyam oneness of nature; sambhavet - it may be; kvacit - sometimes.
One who bathes in the ocean feels a oneness with it. However upon reaching the
shore, one remembers once more the separate state of his body. Similarly the saintly
wives of the cowherd men of Vraja would on occasion taste oneness with Lord
Kåñëa (as in the räsa dance but when again they engaged in their household chores,
they felt duality).

éçvaras tasya saçikä / darçayas tac cakära ha
lokasya këa-bhaktasya / bhaved etat sva-rüpatä 6
éçvaras - supreme Lord; tasya - His; saçikäm - instruction; darçayan - showing;
tat - that; cakära - performed; ha - indeed; lokasya - of the person; këabhaktasya - of the devotee of Kåñëa; bhavet - it may be; etat - this; sva-rüpatä - in

[p.81]
his constitutional nature.
The Lord performed this pastime to show the exalted stage attainable by the Kåñëabhakta, who has awakened his svarüpa in relation to Çré Kåñëa.

yathätra na vimuhyanti / janä ity abhyaçikayan
bhakta-deho bhagavato / hy ätmä caiva na saçayaù 7
yathä - so that; atra - in this matter; na - not; vimuhyanti - they are bewildered;
janäù - people; iti - thus; abhyaçikayan - teaching; bhakta-dehaù - the body of a
devotee; bhagavataù - of the Lord; hi - indeed; ätmä - self; ca - and; eva - surely;
na - not; saçayaù - doubt.
So that people are not confused regarding this point, the Gaura Hari taught here
that He lives and acts through the body of His devotee. Of this there is no doubt.

këaù keçi-vadha ktvä / näradäyätmano yaçaù
tejaç ca darçayäm äsa / tato muni-varo bhuvi 8
papäta daëòavat tasmin / sthäne çata-guëädhikam
phalam äpnoti gatvä tu / vaiëavo mathurä purém 9
këaù - Lord Kåñëa; keçi-vadham - the killing of Keçi, the horse demon; ktvä did; näradäya - for Çré Närada; ätmanaù - of Himself; yaçaù - fame; tejaù - power;
ca - and; darçayäm äsa - showed; tataù - then; muni-varaù - the best of sages;
bhuvi - on the earth; papäta - he fell; daëòavat - like a stick; tasmin - in that;
sthäne - place; çata-guëa-adhikam - more than a hundred times; phalam - result;
äpnoti - he obtains; gatvä - having gone; tu - but; vaiëavaù - the devotee of
Viñëu; mathuräm purém - Çré Mathurä city.
When Lord Kåñëa slew the Keçé demon, and thus dsplayed His glory and power to
Närada, that exalted sage fell to the earth offering obeisances like a rod. Thus that
vaiñëava's transcendental quality became magnified one hundred times as he
departed for Mathurä.

[p.82]
eva rämo jagad-yonir / viçva-rüpam adarçayat
çiväya punar eväsau / mänuém akarot kriyäm 9
evam - thus; rämaù - Balaräma; jagat-yoniù - womb of the universe; viçvarüpam - Çré Viçvarüpa; adarçayat - showed; çiväya - for auspiciousness; punaù again; eva - certainly; asau - he; mänuém - human-like; akarot - did; kriyäm deeds.
Similarly Çré Rämacandra, the cause of the cosmic manifestation showed His
universal form to Çiva and thereafter He performed further human-like activities.

punaù çëuva bho brahman / caitanyasya kathä çubhäm
tac chrutvä çraddhayä martyo / mucyate bhava-bandhanät 11
punaù - again; çëuva - hear; bho - Oh!; brahman - brähmaëa; caitanyasya - of
Çré Caitanya; kathäm - story; çubhäm - sublime; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing;
çraddhayä - with faith; martyaù - a mortal; mucyate - is liberated; bhavabandhanät - from the bondage of birth and death.
O brähmaëa, listen further to the sublime history of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. A
mortal being who hears it with full faith becomes freed from the bondage of birth
and death.

guror gehe vasan jiëur / vedän sarvän adhétavän
päöhayäm äsa çiyän sa / sarasvaté-patiù svayam 12
guroù - of the guru; gehe - in the house; vasan - staying; jiëuù - victorious;
vedän - the Vedas; sarvän - all; adhétavän - studied; päöhayäm äsa - taught; çiyän students; saù - He; sarasvaté-patiù - the protector of Sarasvaté; svayam - Himself.
While staying in the house of His guru, the victorious Lord, the husband of
Sarasvaté, studied all the Vedas. Thereafter He began to teach His own students.

[p.83]
tat-pitäpi mahä-bhägo / vedäntädén paöhan sukhé
tataç ca punar äyäto / jagannätho dvijarabhaù 13
tat-pitä - His father; api - however; mahä-bhägaù - greatly fortunate; vedäntaädén - Vedänta-sütra and other scriptures; paöhan - studying; sukhé - happily;
tataù - then; ca - and; punaù - again; äyätaù - returned; jagannäthaù - Jagannätha
Miçra; dvija-åabhaù - best of brähmaëas .
While Çré Gaura Hari was happily studying Vedänta-sütra and the other scriptures,
His most fortunate father the exalted brähmaëa, Jagannätha Miçra returned to the
Lord's abode.

daiva-yogena tasyäbhüj / jvaraù präëäpahärakaù
atas ta tädça dtvä / saha mäträ svaya hariù 14
jagäma jähnavé-tére / nija-bhaktaiù samävtaù
çrémän-viçvambharo devo / hari-kértana-tat-paraiù 15
daiva-yogena - by the will of Providence; tasya - of him; abhüt - there was;
jvaraù - a fever; präëa - life; apahärakaù - taking away; ataù - then; tam - that;
tädçam - such a state; dtvä - seeing; saha - with; mäträ - His mother; svayam Himself; hariù - the remover of sin; jagäma - went; jähnavé-tére - on the bank of
the Gaìgä; nija-bhaktaiù - with His own devotees; samävtaù - surrounded;
çrémän viçvambharaù - Çré Viçvambhara; devaù - the Lord; hari-kértana-tat-paraiù
- whose minds were wholly absorbed in Hari-kértana.
By the will of providence, Jagannätha became afflicted with a fever that plundered
his very life force. Seeing that His father was in such a condition, Viçvambhara Hari
together with His mother brought His father to the bank of the Gaìgä surrounded
by bhagavad-bhaktas all of whom were fully absorbed in Hari-kértana, .

atha tasya pada-dvaya hariù / pitur äliìgya sa-gadgada-svaram
avadat pitar äçu mä prabho / parihäya kvä bhavän gamiyasi 16

[p.84]
atha - thereafter; tasya - His; pada-dvaya - two feet; harih - the dispeller of sin;
pituù - of His father; äliìgya - embracing; sa-gadgada - with a choked voice;
svaram - sound; avadat - said; pita - O father; äçu - soon; mäm - Me; prabho - O
master; parihäya - giving up; kvä - where?; bhavän - your worshipable self;
gamiyasi - you will go.
Embracing His father's feet, Çré Hari addressed him in a voice choked with tears,
"O venerable master, dear father, you are abandoning Me so suddenly. Where will
you now go?"

iti väg-amta sutasya saù / çravaëäbhyä paripéya sädaram
avadad raghu-nätha-pädayos tava / samyak susamarpaëa ktam 17
iti - thus; väk-amtam - nectarean words; sutasya - of His son; saù - he;
çravaëäbhyäm - with his ears; paripéya - drinking; sa-ädaram - with eagerness;
avadat - he said; raghu-nätha-pädayoù - at the feet of Räma Candra; tava - of
You; samyak - complete; su-samarpaëam - fully dedicated; ktam - done.
His father eagerly drank through his ears his son's nectarean words,and replied, "I
have wholly dedicated You wholly to the feet of Lord Räghunätha."

gagane sura-varya-sahatau / sa-mahendre samupasthite divä
hari-saìkértana-tat-pare jane / dyu-nadé-toya-gato dvijottamaù 18
parihäya tanu divaukasä / ratham ästhäya yayau hareù purém
nitya-siddha-çaréro 'pi mahätmä / loka-hitäcaraëäya yathä-sukham
19
gagane - in the sky; sura-varya - best of the godly beings; sahatau - together; samahä-indre - with the great Indra; samupasthite - situated; divä - in heaven; harisaìkértana - in congregational chanting of Hari's names; tat-pare - absorbed;
jane - the people; dyu-nadé-toya - in the water of the celestial river; gataù - gone;

[p.85]
dvija-uttamaù - best among the twice born; parihäya - giving up; tanum - body;
divaukasäm - of the residents of heaven; ratham - chariot; ästhäya - becoming
situated; yayau - he went; hareù - of Lord Hari; purém - city; nitya-siddha-çaréraù
- body of an eternally liberated being; api - and; mahä-ätmä - great soul; lokahita - the welfare of the people; äcaraëäya - for setting an example; yathäsukham - as he liked.
When the best of the gods with mighty Indra appeared in the sky and the people
on earth were immersed in hari-saìkértana, then that best of the twice-born entered
the waters of the Gaìgä, abandoning his mortal coil. Taking his seat on a chariot of
the celestials, he departed for Çré Hari's abode. He was an eternally liberated soul,
who came by his free will to benefit humanity by showing an example of pure
paternal devotion.

atha siddha-gata pati çacé / paridénä vilaläpa duùkhitä
caraëe vinipatya sä prabhoù / kuraréva pramadä-gaëävtä 20
atha - then; siddha-gatam - attained perfection; patim - husband; çacé - Çacé
Mätä; paridénä - much forlorn; vilaläpa - lamented; duùkhitä - unhappy; caraëe at his feet; vinipatya - falling down; sä - she; prabhoù - of her master; kuraré female osprey; iva - like; pramadä - women; gaëa-ävtä - surrounded by a group.
When Jagannätha Miçra had departed for the destination of perfected souls, Çacé
Devé was deeply afflicted with grief. Surrounded by a group of women, she fell
lamenting at the feet of her prabhu, as the female osprey laments for her lost mate.

pitara vilapito muhur dçor / apatad väri-jharo dayä-nidheù
gaja-mauktika-hära-vibhrama / vidadhad vakasi lakaëa babhau 21
pitaram - father; vilapitaù - lamented; muhuù - repeatedly; dçoù - from His
eyes; apatat - fell; väri-jharaù - a waterfall; dayä-nidheù - from the ocean of
mercy; gaja-mauktika - pearls from an elephant's brow; hära-vibhramam - an
enchanting necklace; vidadhad - He placed; vakasi - on the chest; lakaëa - a sign
of good fortune; babhau - shone.

[p.86]
As the ocean of mercy repeatedly grieved for His father, tears cascaded down from
His eyes and glistened on His chest creating an illusion of a lustrous string of pearls.

atha bandhu-janaiù praçäntitaù / pariëämocita-sat-kriyä prabhuù
akarot parivedanänvito / vidhi-dtyä sakalä saha dvijaiù 22
atha - then; bandhu-janaiù - by His kinsmen; praçäntitaù - pacified; pariëäma good result; ucita - suitable; sat-kriyäm - sanctified activities; prabhuù - the
master; akarot - made; parivedana - sorrow; anvitaù - filled with; vidhi-dtyä according to precept; sakaläm - all; dvijaiù - by the brähmaëas.
Though filled with sadness, Prabhu was pacified by His kinsmen. Then He
performed acts of purification to invoke an auspicious future for His father. All
these were performed by brähmaëas according to the guidance of scripture.

vimanä iva saïcitair dhanaiù / pit-yajïa pit-vatsalo 'karot
dvija-püjana-sat-kriyä kramäd / vidadhe tä sa dharädi-bhäjanaiù 23
vimanä - depressed; iva - as if; saïcitaiù - accumulated; dhanaiù - wealth; pityajïam - a sacrifice for His father; pit-vatsalaù - affectionate to His father; akarot
- made; dvija-püjana - worship of the twice-born; sat-kriyäm - pure activities;
kramät - in order; vidadhe - He performed; täm - that; saù - He; dhara-ädibhäjanaiù - with pots made from earth and other ingredients.
Apparently dejected, the Lord feeling very affectionate for His father, used His
accumulated wealth to perform a yajïa for his father's welfare utilizing clay pots and
other pure ingredients. Afterwards, He honored each of the brähmaëas present
according to their seniority and age.

iti yo vadati prabhoù pitur / diva-sasthänam atandrito naraù
labhate dyu-nadé hareù purém / parihäyäçu mala sa gacchati 24
iti - thus; yaù - who; vadati - speaks; prabhoù - of the Lord; pituù - of the

[p.87]
father; diva-sasthänam - entrance in the divine realm; atandritaù - attentively;
naraù - a man; labhate - attains; dyu-nadém - divine river Gaìgä; hareù - of Hari;
purém - the city; parihäya - giving up; äçu - swiftly; malam - contamination; saù he; gacchati - goes.
A man who recites with attention this narration of the entrance of Çré Gauräìga's
father into the spiritual abode will also attain the sky-Gaìgä at death. Immediately
giving up all contamination, he will attain the abode of Çré Hari.

Thus ends the Eighth Sarga entitled "Jagannätha Miçra Attains the Highest
Perfection," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Ninth Sarga
çré-lakñmy-udväha
Çré Gauräìga's Marriage with Çrématé Lakñmé Devé

tataù papäöha sa punaù / çrémän çré-viëu-paëòität
sudarçanät paëòitäc ca / çré-gaìgä-däsa-paëòität 1
tataù - thereafter; papäöha - He studied; saù - He; punaù - again; çrémän çré-viëupaëòität - from the eminent scholar named Çré Viñëu Paëita; sudarçanät paëòitäö
- from Çré Sudarçana Paëita; ca - and; çré-gaìgä-däsa-paëòität - from Çré
Gaìgädäsa Paëita.
Thereafter Viçvambhara made further studies under the eminent scholars Çré Viñëu
Paëita, Sudarçana Paëita and Gaìgädäsa Paëòita.

brähmaëebhyo dadau vidyäm / ye paëòitä mahattamäù

[p.88]
teä mahopakäräya / tebhyo vidyä ghétavän 2
brähmaëebhyaù - to the brähmaëas; dadau - He gave; vidyäm - knowledge; ye who; paëòitäù - learned men; mahattamäù - great men; teäm - of them; mahäupakäräya - for their great benefit; tebhyaù - from them; vidyäm - knowledge;
ghétavän - took.
He gave knowledge to those highly learned brähmaëas, and for their great benefit
He accepted knowledge from them.

loka-çikäm anucaran / mäyä-manuja-vigrahaù
tataù paöhan paëòiteu / çrémat-sudarçaneu ca 3
loka-çikäm - teaching the world; anucaran - following; mäyä-manuja-vigrahaù the illusory form of a man; tataù - then; paöhan - studying; paëòiteu - amongst
the scholars; çrémat-sudarçaneu - Çré Sudarçana and the others; ca - and.
In order to instruct humanity, Çré Hari accepted a man-like form apparently made
of the illusory energy, and thus followed the path of study under the direction Çré
Sudarçana and the other Paëitas.

sa-térthaiù prahasan vipraiù / häsadbhiù parihäsakam
uväca baìgajair vakyai / rasa-jïaù sa-smitänanaù 4
sa-térthaiù - on pilgrimage; prahasan - laughing; vipraiù - with the learned
brähmaëas; häsadbhiù - with joking; parihäsakam - jesting; uväca - said;
baìgajaiù - with Bengali; vakyaiù - with words; rasa-jïaù - conversant in the
rasas; sa-smitänanaù - with His smiling face.
He who is conversant in every rasa would with merrily tell jokes in the Bengali
language with brähmaëas traveling on pilgrimage, and He also laughed as they told
amusing tales.

[p.89]
tataù kälena kiyatäcäryasya vana-mälinaù
jagäma puryä ta draöum / kautukät praëatasya saù 5
äbhäya gacchatäcärya / hariëä dadçe pathi
vallabhäcärya-duhitä / sakhé-jana-samävtä 6
tataù - then; kälena - by time; kiyatä - after so much; äcäryasya - of the _cärya;
vana-mälinaù - of Vanamälé; jagäma - went; puryäm - in the city; tam - him;
draöum - to see; kautukät - out of curiosity; praëatasya - for offering obeisances;
saù - He; äbhäya - having spoken; gacchatä - while going; äcärya - the _cärya;
hariëä - by Lord Hari; dadçe - saw; pathi - on the path; vallabhäcärya-duhitä - the
daughter of Vallabha _cärya; sakhé-jana - girl friends; samävtä - surrounded.
After some time had passed, being eager to see Gaura went to the home of _cärya
Vanamälé, the matchmaker, with purpose of accepting a spouse. While Çré Hari
respectfully bade farewell and chatted with the _cärya, He saw the daughter of Çré
Vallabha _cärya on the footpath surrounded by her girlfriends.

snänärtha jähnavé-toye / gacchanté ruciränanä
dtvä tä tädçé jïätvä / manasä janma-käraëam 7
snäna-artham - for the purpose of bathing; jähnavé-toye - in the water of the
Gaìgä; gacchanté - going; rucira-ananä - attractive face; dtvä - having seen; täm her; tädçém - such a lady; jïätvä - knew; manasä - in His heart; janma-käraëam the purpose for His birth.
That lady of radiant countenance was walking to the Jähnavé to take her bath.
When Çré Hari saw that maiden, in His heart He recognized her to be the very
purpose for His birth.

tasya jagäma nilaya / svam eva sva-janaiù saha
çrémän viçvambharo devo / vidyä-rasa-kutühalé 8

[p.90]
tasya - His; jagäma - He went; nilayam - residence; svam - own; eva - indeed;
sva-janaiù - with His friends; saha - with; çrémän viçvambharaù - the glorious
Viçvambhara; devaù - the Lord; vidyä-rasa-kutühalé - eager for the mellows of
scholarship.
Then illustrious Viçvambhara departed for His residence delighting with His
companions in talk of vidyä-rasa.

apare dyuù punas tatra / vanamälé dvijottamaù
äcäryaù çri-harer geham / ägatya praëaman çacém 9
apare dyuù - on the next day; punaù - again; tatra - there; vanamälé - Vanamälé
_cärya; dvija-uttamaù - excellent brähmaëa; äcäryaù - teacher; çri-hareù - of Çré
Hari; geham - home; ägatya - coming; praëaman - offering homage; çacém - to
Çacé Mätä.
On the next day, the transcendental brähmaëa, Vanamälé came to the home of Çré
Gaura Hari, and bowed respectfully to Çacé Devé.

uväca madhurä väëé / çrémad-viçvambharasya te
sutasyodvahanärthäya / kanyä sura-sutopamäm
vallabhäcärya-varyasya / varayasva yadécchasi 10
uväca - he said; madhuräm - sweet; väëém - words; çrémat-viçvambharasya - of
Çré Viçvambhara; te - your; sutasya - of your son; udvahana - marrying; arthäya for the purpose of; kanyäm - your daughter; sura-sutä - daughter of a god;
upamäm - like; vallabhäcärya - Vallabha _cärya; varyasya - of the excellent
person; varayasva - choose; yadi - if; icchasi - you desire.
He spoke sweetly to her thus, "If you wish to get your son Viçvambhara married, I
suggest that you select Lakñmé Devé, the goddess-like daughter of that excellent
brähmaëa, Vallabhäcärya."

[p.91]
etat çrutvä çacé präha / bälo 'sau mama putrakaù
piträ vihénaù paöhatu / tatrodyogo vidhéyatäm 11
etat - this; çrutvä - hearing; çacé - Çacé Mätä; präha - said; bälaù - boy; asau He; mama - my; putrakaù - son; piträ - by His father; vihénaù - without; paöhatu He must study; tatra - there; udyogaù - efforts; vidhéyatäm - should be placed.
Hearing this, Çacé Devé replied, "My son is but a fatherless boy. At present His
efforts must be directed towards his studies."

iti çrutvä vacas tasyä / näti-hta-manä yayau
äcäryo dtaväs tatra / pathi këa mudänvitam 12
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; vacaù - words; tasyäù - her; na - not; ati-hta - very
joyful; manä - mind; yayau - went; äcäryaù - the _cärya; dtavän - saw; tatra there; pathi - on the path; këam - Lord Kåñëa; mudä - happiness; anvitam - filled
with.
Hearing her words, the _cärya went his way somewhat dejected. But after walking
a while on the path he caught sight of GauraKåñëa whose heart was brimming over
with gladness.

bhagaväs ta praëamyäçu / samäliìgya sunirbharam
kva bhavän adya gantäsi / papraccha madhura vacaù 15
bhagavän - the Supreme Lord; tam - to him; praëamya - bowing down; äçu swiftly; samäliìgya - having embraced; su-nirbharam - very tightly; kva - where?;
bhavän - your honor; adya - today; gantäsi - you will go; papraccha - he
inquired; madhuram - sweet; vacaù - words.
Gaura Bhagavän at once bowed to Vanamälé and embracing him very firmly, he
inquired in a sweet voice, "Where is your honor going today?"

[p.92]
sa äha matuç caraëa / tava dtvä samägataù
nivedita mayä tasyai / tavodvähäya tatra sä 14
çraddhä na vidhate tena / vimanäù savrajämy aham
ity ukte nottara datvä / prahasya prayayau hariù 15
saù - he; äha - said; matuù - of Your mother; caraëam - feet; tava - Your; dtvä seen; samägataù - come; niveditam - offering; mayä - by me; tasyai - unto her;
tava - Your; udvähäya - for marriage; tatra - there; sä - she; çraddhäm - faith; na not; vidhate -she placed; tena - for this reason; vimanäù - dejected; savrajämi - I
am going; aham - I; iti - thus; ukte - having said; na - not; uttaram - answer;
datvä - having given; prahasya - laughing; prayayau - went forth; hariù - Çré
Hari.
Vanamälé replied, "I have just come from seeing the feet of Your mother. There I
made a suggestion to her regarding Your marriage, but she had no faith in my
proposal. For this reason I am now walking despondent-ly." Gaura Hari made no
commment on the _cärya's words but walked on laughing.

ägatya sväçrama präha / mätara ki tvayoditam
äcäryäya vacaù so 'pi / vimanäù pathi gacchati 16
ägatya - arriving; sva-äçramam - His own äçrama; präha - said; mätaram - O
mother; kim - why?; tvayä - by you; uditam - said; äcäryäya - to the _cärya;
vacaù - statement; saù - he; api - and; vimanäù - depressed; pathi - on the path;
gacchati - goes.
Arriving back at His own äçrama, Gaura said, "Mätä, what did you say to the
_cärya that made him so depressed as he walked on the path?"

katha na tasya saprétaù / ktä mätaù priyoktibhiù
etaj jïätvä sutasyäçu / matam äpta-jana punaù 17

[p.93]
äcärya tvarayä netu / preayäm äsa sä çubhä
äcäryaù sahasägatya / namasktväbravéd idam 18
katham - how?; na - not; tasya - of him; saprétaù - well-loved; ktä - done;
mätaù - O mother; priya-uktibhiù - by dear sayings; etat - this; jïätvä - knowing;
sutasya - of the son; äçu - soon; matam - mind; äpta-janam - a trusted person;
punaù - again; äcäryam - the _cärya; tvarayä - swiftly; netum - to bring; preayäm
äsa - sent; sä - she; çubhä - blessed; äcäryaù - the teacher; sahasä - speedily;
ägatya - having come; namasktvä - having offered obeisances; äbravét - said;
idam - this.
"Why did you not make him feel well-loved by offering pleasing words?" Suddenly
His blessed mother became aware of the state of her son's mind, and she sent a
trustworthy person to call back the _cärya. Quickly Vanamälé returned and after
respectfully bowing to her, he spoke thus:

katham éçvari mämäjïäm / akarot tad bravétu me
saprahto vacaù çrutvä / bhavatyäù sannidhäv aham 19
katham - what?; éçvari - O queen; mäm - me; äjïäm - order; akarot - did; tat that; bravétu - just say; me - to me; saprahtaù - very happy; vacaù - statement;
çrutvä - having heard; bhavatyäù - of your good self; sannidhau - in the vicinity;
aham - I.
"Dear queen! What is your order? Please instruct me. Upon receiving your
message, I have become most elated and returned to your gracious presence."

evam ukte tataù präha / ta çacé yat tvayä vacaù
udhvähärtha tu kathita / tat kartu tvam ihärhasi 20
evam - thus; ukte - having spoken; tataù - then; präha - she said; tam - to him;
çacé - Çrématé Çacé Devé; yat - what; tvayä - by you; vacaù - words; udhvähaartham - for the purpose of marriage; tu - but; kathitam - said; tat - that; kartum -

[p.94]
to do; tvam - you; iha - now; arhasi - ought.
At this, she replied, "Kindly carry out the suggestion which you made to me
earlier concerning the marriage of Viçvambhara.

tva suhd-vatsalo 'téva / sutasya svayam eva tat
purä prokta sneha-vaçät / tatra tvä ki vadämy aham 21
tvam - you; suht - a good friend; vatsalaù - affectionate; atéva - very much;
sutasya - of my son; svayam - spontaneous; eva - indeed; tat - that; purä formerly; proktam - spoken; sneha-vaçät - controlled by affection; tatra - there;
tväm - you; kim - what; vadämi - I say; aham - I.
"Of your own accord you are acting as a good and affectionate friend of my son.
Whatever I said before to you was also motivated by love for my son. What more
can I say?"

etat çrutvä vacas tasyäù / prähäcäryo naman vacaù
éçvari tvad-vaco nitya / karomi çirasä vahan 22
etat - this; çrutvä - hearing; vacaù - words; tasyäù - of her; präha - said; äcäryaù
- the _cärya; naman - bowing; vacaù - words; éçvari - O queen; tvat-vacaù - your
words; nityam - always; karomi - I do; çirasä - with my head; vahan - carrying.
Hearing her words, the _cärya bowed his head and said, "O queen, I shall ever
carry out your orders, bearing them on my head.

ity uktvä prayayau tatra / vallabho miçra-sattamaù
yatra tithati tatraiva / so 'py udyamya tvaränvitaù 23
dideçäsanam änéya / svayam eva yathä-vidhi
misraù papraccha vinayäd / äcärya-vanamälinam 24

[p.95]
iti - thus; uktvä - having spoken; prayayau - went off; tatra - there; vallabhaù Çré Vallabha; miçra-sattamaù - the best of scholars; yatra - where; tithati - he
stays; tatra - there; eva - surely; saù - he; api - and; udyamya - rising up; tvaraanvitaù - full of speed; dideça - he directed; äsanam - seat; änéya - brought;
svayam - spontaneously; eva - indeed; yathä-vidhim - according to etiquette;
miçraù - the scholar; papraccha - inquired; vinayät - out of respect; äcäryavanamälinam - of Vanamälé _cärya.
So saying, Vanamälé went to Çré Vallabha's house. That noble brähmaëa quickly
stood up and showed him to a seat, as etiquette requires. Then with respect he
inquired from Vanamälé _cärya about his welfare:

mamänugraha evätra / tavägamana-käraëam
anyad västi kiyat kärya / tad äjïä kartum arhasi 25
mama - my; anugrahaù - mercy; eva - surely; atra - here; tava - your; ägamanakäraëam - the cause of your coming; anya - other; vä - or; asti - there is; kiyat how much?; käryam - service; tat - that; äjïäm - order; kartum - to make; arhasi you ought.
"Your reason for coming is surely to show me mercy. However, if there is any
service that I can render you, please order me."

evam ukte tataù prähäcärya çëu vaco mama
miçra-purandara-sutaù / çré-viçvambhara-paëòitaù 26
sa eva tava kanyäyä / yogyaù sad-guëa-saçrayaù
patis tena vadämy adya / dehi tasmai sutä çubhäm 27
evam - thus; ukte - having spoken; tataù - then; präha - he said; äcärya - O
teacher; çëu - hear; vacaù - words; mama - my; miçra purandara - titled
Purandara; sutaù - the son; çré-viçvambhara - Çré Viçvambhara; paëòitaù - the
scholar; saù - He; eva - indeed; tava - your; kanyäyäù - of the daughter; yogyaù -

[p.96]
suitable; sat-guëa - good qualities; saçrayaù - shelter; patiù - husband; tena therefore; vadämi - I say; adya - today; dehi - give; tasmai - to Him; sutäm daughter; çubhäm - lovely.
When Vallabha had spoken thus, Vanamälé _cärya replied,"O _cärya, please hear
my words! The son of Miçra Purandara named Çré Viçvambhara Paëita, who is an
abode of divine qualities, is the suitable husband for your daughter Lakñmé.
Therefore I declare that today you should present your lovely daughter to Him."

tat çrutvä vacana tasya / miçraù kärya vicärya ca
uväca çrüyatä bhägya-vaçäd etad bhaviyati 28
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vacanam - statement; tasya - his; miçraù - the
scholar; käryam - duty; vicärya - considering; ca - and; uväca - said; çrüyatäm hear; bhägya - good fortune; vaçät - by the influence; etat - this; bhaviyati - will
be.
Hearing this statement, the scholar considered his duty and said, "Hear me. By the
power of divine Providence this marriage must indeed come to pass.

mayä dhana-vihénena / kiïcid dätu na çakyate
kanyakaiva pradätavyä / taträjïä kartum arhasi 29
mayä - by me; dhana-vihénena - bereft of wealth; kiïcit - any; dätum - to give;
na - not; çakyate - it is possible; kanyakä - daughter; eva - surely; pradätavyä should be given; tatra - there; äjïäm - order; kartum - to do; arhasi - you ought.
"But I have no wealth, and thus it is not possible for me to give any dowry. I can
give only my my daughter. Therefore kindly offer me some advice in this matter.

yadi vä me hariù préto / bhagavän duhitur bhavet
tadaiva me sambhavati / jämätä paëòitottamaù 30

[p.97]
yadi - if; vä - or; me - of me; hariù - Lord Hari; prétaù - dear; bhagavän - the
Supreme Lord; duhituù - on account of my daughter; bhavet - it may be; tadä then; eva - certainly; me - my; sambhavati - become; jämätä - son-in-law; paëòita
- scholar; uttamaù - the excellent.
"If Çré Hari, the Master of all opulence, is pleased with me then by means of my
daughter this best of scholars can certainly become my son-in-law.

ratnena muktä-sayogo / guëenaiva yathä bhavet
yathä bhavad-guëenaivänayor yogo bhaviyati 31
ratnena - with a jewel; muktä-sayogaù - joined with a pearl; guëena - by
quality; eva - certainly; yathä - as; bhavet - may be; yathä - as; bhavat - your;
guëena - by quality; eva - certainly; anayoù - of these two; yogaù - union;
bhaviyati - it shall be.
"But as a pearl is joined with a gem by means of a valuable thread, so these two
can be joined in wedlock only through your invaluable connec-tion."

ity ukte parama-préta / äcäryaù präha sädaram
bhavad-vinaya-vätsalyät / sarva sampädyate çubham 32
iti - thus; ukte - having spoken; parama-prétaù - very pleased; äcäryaù - the
_cärya; präha - said; sa-ädaram - with respect; bhavat - your; vinaya - humility;
vätsalyät - on account of affection; sarvam - all; sampädyate - it comes about;
çubham - auspicious.
When Vallabha spoke thus, Vanamälé became very pleased and replied
respectfully, "Because of your humility and affection for your daughter, everything
must surely come about auspiciously."

ity uktvä punar ägamya / sarva çacyai nyavedayat
äcäryo gaura-candrasya / vivähänanda-nirvtaù 33

[p.98]
iti - thus; uktvä - speaking; punaù - again; ägamya - coming; sarvam - all;
çacyai - unto Çacé Devé; nyavedayat - made known; äcäryaù - the _cärya; gauracandrasya - of Gaura Candra; viväha - marriage; änanda - bliss; nirvtaù immersed.
So saying, he again returned to Çacé Devé and informed her of all that had
happened. Just by thinking of Gaura Candra's wedding, the _cärya became
immersed in bliss.

etat sarva saviditvä / suta proväca sä çacé
samayo 'ya kuruvätra / täta vaivähika vidhim 34
etat - that; sarvam - all; saviditvä - having known; sutam - son; proväca - told;
sä - she; çacé - Çacé Mätä; samayaù - time; ayam - this; kuruva - perform; atra now; täta - dear son; vaivähikam - wedding; vidhim - ritual.
Upon being apprised of everything, Çacé Mätä spoke to her son, "Dear boy, the
time has now come for You to take a wife in accordance with the principles of
dharma.

tat çrutvä vacana mätur / vimçya manasä hariù
äjïä tasyäh purasktya / dravyäëy äçu samäharat 35
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vacanam - words; mätuù - of His mother; vimçya considering; manasä - in His mind; hariù - the remover of sin; äjïäm - order;
tasyäh - of her; purasktya - honoring; dravyäëi - materials; äçu - quickly;
samäharat - collected.
Hearing this instruction from His mother, Gaura Hari considered them in His
heart. Then honoring her order, He quickly collected the materials for the ceremony.

tato vaivähike käle / maìgale sad-guëäçraye

[p.99]
sarveäm eva çubha-de / mdaìga-paëavähate 36
tataù - then; vaivähike - at the wedding; käle - time; maìgale - auspicious; satguëa - good qualities; äçraye - taken shelter of; sarveäm - of all; eva - indeed;
çubha-de - bestowing auspiciousness; mdaìga-paëava - mdaìgas and
kettledrums; ähate - beaten.
At an auspicious moment for marriage, in which all good qualities took shelter,
when mdaìgas were deftly played and kettledrums beaten...

bhü-deva-gaëa-saìgasya / veda-dhvani-ninädite
dépa-mälä-patäkädyair / alaìkta-dig-antare 37
bhü-deva-gaëa - the assembly of brähmaëas; saìgasya - of the association; vedadhvani - Vedic mantras; ninädite - sounded; dépa - lights; mälä - garlands; patäkä flags; ädyaiù - et cetera; alaìkta - decorated; dik-antare - in all directions.
...when Vedic mantras were intoned by the assembly of brähmaëas, when all
directions were decorated by lamps, garlands of flowers, flags, festoons and so
forth...

deva-därv-aguru-çéra-candanädi-pradhüpite
adhiväsa hareç cakre / viväha dvija-sattamäù 38
deva-däru - pine; aguru - aloes; çéra-candana - sandalwood; ädi - and so forth;
pradhüpite - perfumed; adhiväsam - preliminary marriage rituals; hareù - of
Gaura Hari; cakre - conducted; viväham - the wedding; dvija-sattamäù - the best
of brähmaëas.
...then did saintly brähmaëas began the adhiväsa ceremony to purify the household
of Çré Hari with pine scent, aguru, scented grasses, sandal and other pleasing
fragances.

Thus ends the Ninth Sarga entitled "Çré Gauräìga's Marriage with Çrématé

[p.100]
Lakñmé Devé" in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Tenth Sarga
gaura-vivähika
Festivities at Gaura's Wedding

tato dvijebhyaù pradadau muhur muhuù / pügäni mälyäni ca
gandhavanti
sa-candana gandham ananya-saurabha / janäç ca sarve jahur jagur
mudä 1
tataù - then; dvijebhyaù - unto the brähmaëas; pradadau - He gave; muhuù
muhuù - again and again; pügäni - betel nuts; mälyäni - garlands; ca - and;
gandhavanti - fragrant; sa-candanam - with sandalwood; gandham - scents;
ananya-saurabham - incomparable fragrance; janäù - the people; ca - and; sarve all; jahuù - rejoiced; jaguù - sang; mudä - in bliss.
Then the Lord gave to each and every member of the twice-born, chewing pän with
spices and a fragrant flower garland. Then He anointed them with pulp of sandal
and scented oils of matchless fragance. All the people exultantly sang out of
gladness.

sa vallabho 'bhyetya su-maìgalair dvijair / naraiç ca bhüdeva-pativratädibhiù
jämätara gandha-sugandhi-mälyai / çubhädhiväsa vidadhe
samarcya tam 2
saù - He; vallabhaù - Vallabha _cärya; abhyetya - arrived; su-maìgalaiù - with

[p.101]
very auspicious; dvijaiù - brähmaëas; naraiù - with men; ca - and; bhü-deva brähmaëas; pati-vratä - chaste wives; ädibhiù - and others; jämätaram - son-in law; gandha - scents; su-gandhi-mälyaiù - very fragrant garlands; çubha resplendent; adhiväsam - marriage rituals; vidadhe - he bestowed; samarcya having honored; tam - Him.
Çré Vallabha _cärya came with saintly brähmaëas, accompanied by their chaste
wives and others. He worshipped his son-in-law by offering Him scented oils and
fragrant garlands.

atha prabhäte vimale 'ruëe 'rke / svaya kta-snäna-vidhir yathävat
hariù samabhyarcya pitn surädén / nändémukha-çräddham
athäkarot dvijaiù 3
atha - then; prabhäte - dawn; vimale - clear; aruëe - reddening arke - when the
sun; svayam - Himself; kta-snäna-vidhiù - took His bath according to scripture;
yathävat - correctly; hariù - Gaura Hari; samabhyarcya - having worshipped; pitn
- the forefathers; sura-ädén - the godly controllers and others; nändé-mukhaçräddham - ceremony to benefit ancestors in a diseased condition; atha - then;
akarot - did; dvijaiù - with the brähmaëas.
Then at dawn when the clear sky was reddened by the rising sun, Gaura Hari took
His bath according to the guidance of scripture, and with the assistance of
brähmaëas He ritually honored His forefathers and offered them oblations to relieve
them of any distress. He also offered oblations to the gods and to all godly beings.

tato dvijänä yajuä sunisvanair / mdaìga-bheré-paöahädi-näditaiù
varäìganävakt-saroja-maìgalo- / jjvala-svanair ävavdhe
mahotsavaù 4
tataù - then; dvijänäm - of the brähmaëas; yajuäm - of the Yajur Veda; sunisvanaiù - with pleasant sounds; mdaìga - clay drum; bheré - kettledrum;
paöaha - tabor drum; ädi - and others; näditaiù - with sounds; vara-aìganä -

[p.102]
beautiful women; vaktra - mouth; saroja - lotus; maìgala - auspicious; ujjvala effulgent; svanaiù - with sounds; ävavdhe - flourished; mahotsavaù - the festival.
Then a great festival flourished throughout the day as the pleasing vibrations of
the brähmaëas intoning mantras from the Yajur Veda combined with the rhythmic
beats of mdaìgas, kettle drums, tabors and other drums, as well as the charming
and auspicious sounds of ululating from the lotus-like lips of the lovely ladies.

çacé susapüjya kula-striya mudä / taträgatän bandu-janäç ca
sarvaçaù
uväca ki bhart-vihénayä mayä / kartavyam evätra bhavad-vidhaiù
svayam 5
çacé - Çacé Devé; su-sapüjya - having nicely worshipped; kula-striyam - ladies of
the family; mudä - with delight; tatra - there; ägatän - having come; bandu-janän male relatives; ca - and; sarvaçaù - by all manner; uväca - said; kim - what?;
bhart-vihénayä - by being bereft of my husband; mayä - by me; kartavyam should be done; eva - indeed; atra - here; bhavat-vidhaiù - by such persons as
you; svayam - yourselves.
Çacé Devé joyously welcomed the ladies of her family as well as the gentlemen in
every way she could. She requested of them, "How can I, a poor widow, perform
this wedding alone? Kindly assist me by doing all that requires to be done."

sva-mätur ittha karuëänvita vaco / niçamya täta paritapta-cittaù
muktä-phala-sthülataräçru-bindün / uväha vakaù sthala-häravibhramän 6
sva-mätuù - of His mother; ittham - thus; karuëä-anvitam - doleful; vacaù words; niçamya - hearing; tätam - dear father; paritapta - very anguished; cittaù mind; muktä-phala - pearls; sthülatara - bigger; äçru-bindün - tear drops; uväha made a flow; vakaù - chest; sthala - mound; hära - necklace; vibhramän illusion.

[p.103]
Hearing such pitiable words from His mother, Gaura Hari's mind became much
distressed by thoughts of His dear father, and from His eyes tear-drops larger than
pearls fell upon the mounds of His chest, making the illusion of a necklace.

nirékya putra karuëänvita çacé / suvismitä präha pati-vratädibhiù
pitaù katha maìgala-karmaëi svayam / amaìgala väri vimuïcase
dçoù 7
nirékya - seeing; putram - her son; karuëä-anvitam - sorrowful; çacé - Çré Çacé
Devé; su-vismitä - very mystified; präha - said; pati-vratä - women dedicated to
their husband; ädibhiù - and others; pitaù - O father; katham - how?; maìgalakarmaëi - during an auspicious event; svayam - Yourself; amaìgalam inauspicious; väri - water; vimuïcase - You are releasing; dçoù - from the eyes.
Standing amongst the chaste women, Çacé Devé became struck with wonder, to see
her son so sorrowful. "O father Nimäi," she said, "On this auspicious occasion, why
do You let these inauspicious tears fall from Your eyes?"

sa mätur ittha vacana nipéya / pit-smti-çväsa-malémasänanaù
sa mätur samépa prativäcam ädade / navéna gambhéra-ghana-svana
yathä 8
saù - He; mätuù - of His mother; ittham - thus; vacanam - words; nipéya reproaching; pit - father; smti - remembrance; çväsa - sighs; malémasa darkened; änanaù - face; mätuù - of His mother; samépam - nearby; prativäcam reply; ädade - gave; navéna - new; gambhéra - deep; ghana - cloud; svanam sound; yathä - as.
Nimäi sighed, His face became dark by remembrance of His father, and He
reproached His mother for these words. Standing by her, He replied in a deep voice,
resounding like a water-laden cloud newly arrived in the sky.

[p.104]
dhanäni vä me manujäç ca mätar / na santi ki yena vacaù saméritam
tvayädya déneva paräçraya yataù / pitä mamädarçanatäm agäd iti 9
dhanäni - wealth; vä - or; me - My; manujäù - men; ca - and; mätaù - O
mother!; na - not; santi - they are; kim - whether?; yena - by which; vacaù words; saméritam - uttered; tvayä - by you; adya - today; dénä - lowly; iva - like;
paräçrayam - shelter for others; yataù - whence; pitä - father; mama - my;
adarçanatäm - not visible; agät - gone; iti - thus.
"O Mother, do you speak today as if distressed because I have no wealth and
followers, or is it rather because My father, who gave shelter to others, is no longer
visible to our eyes?

tvayaiva dta dvija-sajjanebhyaù / supüga-pürëäni ca bhäjanäni
vära-traya dätum ananya-säram / sarväìga-samlepana-yogyagandham 10
tvayä - by you; eva - surely; dtam - seen; dvija-sajjanebhyaù - to the saintly
brähmaëas; su-püga-pürëäni - full of good betel; ca - and; bhäjanäni receptacles; vära-trayam - three times; dätum - to give; ananya-säram incomparable essence; sarva-aìga - all the body; samlepana - anointed; yogya suitable; gandham - scented oils.
"You saw the pots filled with fine betelnut given thrice to the saintly brähmaëas
and how they were all anointed with fragrant oils.

anyeu yogyeu ca suvyayo yat / tattva vijänäsi yathä yatheñöam
amartya-käryeu mamästi çaktis / tathäpi loka-carita karomi 11
anyeu - amongst others; yogyeu - suitable; ca - and; su-vyayaù - much expense;
yat - which; tattvam - truth; vijänäsi - you know; yathä yathä- each and every;
iñöam - desired; amartya-käryeu - in immortal duties; mama - my; asti - it is;
çaktiù - energy; tathäpi - still; loka - people; caritam - character; karomi - I

[p.105]
perform.
"You know how much wealth was spent on other deserving persons and how I
satisfied their every desire. Truly My real power lies in spiritual duties, yet still I am
acting in this way to show an exemplary character for all people.

piträ vihéno 'ham agädha-çaktis / tathäpi mätur vacasä dunomi
itérita tasya niçamya mätä / ta çäntayitvä madhurair vacobhiù 12
piträ - by My father; vihénaù - without; aham - I; agädha-çaktiù - unfathomable
power; tathäpi - still; mätuù - of My mother; vacasä - by the words; dunomi - I
am consumed with sorrow; iti - thus; iritam - spoken; tasya - His; niçamya hearing; mätä - mother; tam - Him; çäntayitvä - having consoled; madhuraiù with sweet; vacobhiù - words.
"Although bereft of My father, I possess unfathomable power. Still, dear mother, I
am filled with sorrow to hear you speak such words." Hearing this, His mother
consoled Him sweetly.

prasädhanair açuka-ratna-yugmair / vibhüayäm äsur anarghyamälyair
çré-gaura-candra jagad-eka-bandhu / stréëä mano-jïa rucita sma
yena 13
sa-candanair äguru-sära-gandhaiù / samälipan putram adénaçraddhäù
tadä kumäräù pthivé-suräëäm / samägatäù puruarabha çubhe 14
prasädhanaiù - with ornaments; açuka - garments; ratna-yugmai - with jewels;
vibhüayäm äsuù - they ornamented; anarghya - invaluable; mälyaiù - garlands;
çré-gaura-candram - Lord Gaura Candra; jagat-eka-bandhum - the sole friend of
all living beings; stréëäm - of women; mana-jïam - charming; rucitam - pleasing;
sma - was; yena - by which; sa-candanaiù - with sandalwood pulp; äguru-sära-

[p.106]
gandhaiù - with the fragrant oil of aguru; samälipan - anointing; putram - son;
adéna - noble; çraddhäù - faithful; tadä - then; kumäräù - sons; pthivé-suräëäm of the brähmaëas; samägatäù - assembled; purua-abham - the best of males;
çubhe - on that glorious occasion.
At that auspicious moment, noble and faithful brähmaëas's sons assembled to
anoint Gaura Candra, that best among males, whose attractive luster was enchanting
to the womenfolk, with the pulp of sandal and oil of aguru. They adorned the only
friend of all living beings with silken cloths embroidered by jewels, as well as
garlands of choice flowers and precious necklaces.

tasmin kane vallabha-miçra-varyaù / kärya pitëäm atha devatänä
samäpya kanyä vara-hema-gauré / vibhüitäm äbharaëaiù sa cakre
15
tasmin kane - at that moment; vallabha-miçra-varyaù - the venerable
brähmaëa, Vallabha _cärya; käryam - duty; pitëäm - of the forefathers; atha then; devatänäm - of the demigods; samäpya - completing; kanyäm - daughter;
vara - valuable; hema-gaurém - shone like white gold; vibhüitäm - decorated;
äbharaëaiù - with ornaments; saù - he; cakre - made.
At that moment, the venerable Vallabhäcärya's duty to his forefathers and to the
devatäs, concerning his daughter were complete. His daughter Lakñmé had been
decorated with ornaments and her complexion shone with a luster like precious
white gold.

tato dvijän änayane vareëyän / varasya sapreitavän sametya
ücuç ca te maìgala-pürvam äçu / çubhäya yäträ kuru säma-ghoaiù
16
tataù - then; dvijän - the brähmaëas; änayane - bringing near; vareëyän excellent; varasya - of the bridegroom; sapreitavän - invited; sametya - having
met; ücuù - they said; ca - and; te - to you; maìgala-pürvam - attended by

[p.107]
auspiciousness; äçu - quickly; çubhäya - for auspiciousness; yäträm - festive
procession; kuru - do; säma-ghoaiù - with utterances from the Säma Veda.
Then he brought the exalted brähmaëas, whom he had invited, and after
introducing them to the bridegroom, the brähmaëas said, "To invoke auspiciousness
let us immediately start the festive procession with hymns from the Säma-Veda."

svaya harir vipra-varasya sajjanair / manuya-yäne jaya-nisvanair
yayau
pradépta-dépävalibhir niketana / miçrasya haima çikhara çivo yathä
17
svayam - Himself; hariù - Lord Hari; vipra-varasya - belonging to the best of
the vipras; sat-janaiù - with the good men; manuya-yäne - on the palanquin;
jaya-nisvanaiù - by the sounds of victory; yayau - he went; pradépta-dépaävalibhiù - with the lines of blazing torches; niketanam - home; miçrasya - of the
Miçra; haimam - covered with ice; çikharam - mountain peak; çivaù - Lord Çiva;
yathä - just as.
Then, just as Çiva went with Pärvaté to be wed on a golden peak of Mount Sumeru,
Gaura Hari went to the _cärya's home in a palanquin carried by godly men engaged
by Vallabhäcärya. All the gentlemen called, "Jaya! Jaya!" and lit the way with
blazing torches.

tato 'bhigamyäçramam ätmano nayan / miçraù svaya ta varayä
babhüva
pädyädinä gandha-varäçu-mälyair / dhüpais tathaiväguru-särayuktaiù 18
tataù - then; abhigamya - arriving; äçramam - place for spiritual development;
ätmanaù - own; nayan - leading; miçraù - Çré Miçra; svayam - heart-felt; varayäm
babhüva - He welcomed; pädya-ädinä - with offerings of pädya (footwash), etc.;
gandha-vara - excellent scents; açu-mälyaiù - with lustrous garlands; dhüpaiù -

[p.108]
with incense; tathä eva - and certainly; äguru-sära-yuktaiù - with oil of aguru.
When they arrived at his äçrama, the _cärya himself ushered in Çré Gauräìga and
giving Him a heart-felt welcome. He bathed the Lord's feet, offered valuable gifts,
poured refreshing spiced water to sip, adorned Him with fragrant flower garlands
interwoven with gold tinsel, and burned incense scented with aguru.

babhau varaù pürëa-niçäkara-prabhä / jita-smara-smera-mukhena
rociä
pratapta-cämé-kara-rociä lasat / sumeru-çuddhojjvala-deha-yaöiù 19
babhau - He shone; varaù - the bridegroom; pürëa-niçäkara - the full moon;
prabhä - effulgence; jita-smara - defeating Cupid; smera - smiling; mukhena - by
His face; rociä - by the brightness; pratapta - glowing; cämé-kara - gold; rociä by His effulgence; lasat - shining; su-meru - Mount Meru; çuddha - pure; ujjvala blazing; deha - body; yaöiù - slender.
The golden luminescence of the bridegroom's smiling face shone with the
brightness of the full moon, defeating Cupid, and His slender body was as brilliant
as Mount Sumeru.

kara-dvayenäìgada-kaìkanäìgulé / viräjitenäbja-taläbhiçobhinä
analpa-kalpa-drumam äçu vyähanat / samäçritänäm abhiläa-do
hariù 20
kara-dvayena - with two hands; aìgada - bangles; kaìkana - bracelets; aìgulé rings; viräjitena - with shining; abja - lotus; tala - palms; abhiçobhinä - very
beautified; analpa - not small (great); kalpa-drumam - desire tree; äçu - soon;
vyähanat - defeated; samäçritänäm - of those fully surrendered; abhiläa-daù fulfiller of desires; hariù - Lord Hari.
His hands with beautiful lotus palms glittered with rings, bracelets and bangles,
defeating the opulence of a forest of desire trees, for Çré Hari fulfills the desires of
all those who surrender unto Him.

[p.109]
sutä samänéya niçäkara-prabhäm / prabhä-vinidhvanta-tamaùsamagräm
svälaìktä sädhu dadau jagad-guroù / päde 'bhireje 'tha tayor
abhikhyä 21
sutäm - son; samänéya - bringing; niçäkara-prabhäm - moon-like effulgence;
prabhä - illumination; vinidhvanta - destroyed; tamaù - darkness; samagräm completely; su-alaìktam - nicely decorated; sädhu - well; dadau - he gave; jagatguroh - of the guru of all sentient beings; päde - to the feet; abhireje - brightly
shone; atha - then; tayoù - of those two; abhikhyä - beauty.
The moon-like luster of Çré Vallabha's nicely ornamented daughter dispelled all
darkness. Leading her forward, he offered her at the feet of the guru of all the
worlds. Thus joined together, that couple's beauty shone forth most effulgently.

tayor mukhenduù samarojjvala-çriyä / sa-rohiëé-candra-samaù
suçobhäm
pupoatuù pupa-cayair asiïcatä / paraspara tau hara-pärvatéva 22
tayoù - of those two; mukha-induù - moon-face; samara - meeting; ujjvala brilliant; çriyä - by the opulence; sa-rohiëé - with the star Rohiëé; candra - the
moon; samaù - like; su-çobhäm - very beautiful; pupoatuù - they nourished; pupacayaiù - with heaps of flowers; asiïcatäm - they sprinkled; parasparam - on one
another; tau - they two; hara-pärvaté - Lord Çiva and Pärvaté; iva - like.
When the brilliant opulence of those two luminous faces met, their sublime
splendor brought to mind the conjunction of the moon with the auspicious star
Rohiëé. Then, like Çiva and Pärvaté, they took delight in showering one another with
heaps of flowers.

athopaviöe kamalädhinäthe / lakméç ca tatropaviveça hréyutä
puras tato 'bhyetya çuciù samäviçad / dätu sa kanyä vidhinä vidhäna-

[p.110]
vit 23
atha - then; upaviöe - seated; kamalä - Lakñmé; adhinäthe - the Supreme Lord;
lakméù - Lakmé Devé; ca - and; tatra - there; upaviveça - sat; hré-yutä - with
shyness; puraù - before; tataù - then; abhyetya - approaching; çuciù - pure;
samäviçat - he approached; dätum - to give; saù - he; kanyäm - daughter; vidhinä according to çästra; vidhäna-vit - the knower of the çästra.
The Lord of Lakñmé was seated, and Lakñmé also shyly sat down. Then after
purifying himself by acamana, Vallabhäcärya, who was well conversant with Vedic
precepts, approached the Lord to ritually present his daughter to Him.

yasyäìghri-padme vinivedya pädya / prajä-patiù präpa jagat-siskäm
tatraiva pädya vidadhe sa vallabho / nakha-dyuti-dhvanta-tamaùsamühe 24
yasya - whose; aìghri-padme - at the lotus feet; vinivedya - having offered;
pädyam - a footwash; prajä-patiù - Brahmä; präpa - received; jagat-siskäm - the
determination to create; tatra - there; eva - indeed; pädyam - footwash; vidadhe performed; saù - He; vallabhaù - Vallabha _cärya; nakha - nails; dyuti - light;
dhvanta - darkness; tamaù - ignorance; samühe - accumulation.
In ancient times Çré Brahmä washed those lotus feet. Thus he attained the
intelligence for universal creation. Now Çré Vallabha bathed those same feet. The
_cärya desired to eradicate the darkness in his heart by taking shelter of
Viçvambhara's dazzling toe-nails.

yasmai mahendro 'dhinpäsana dadau / sa-ratna-sihäsana-kambalävtam
tasmai sa kauçeya-suviñöaräsanam / dadau nipéta vara-péta-väsase
25
yasmai - unto whom; mahä-indraù - Lord Indra; adhi-npa-äsanam - seat of the

[p.111]
emperor; dadau - he gave; sa-ratna - with jewels; siha-äsana - lion seat; kambalavtam - covered with a blanket; tasmai - unto Him; saù - he; kauçeya - silk; suviñöara-äsanam - very nice seat; dadau - he gave; nipétam - drank in; vara-pétaväsase - in a beautiful yellow garment.
When Gaura appeared in a former avatära, the great Indra once presented Him his
own imperial lion-throne, bedecked with gems and the royal blanket. Now Çré
Vallabha offered a regal seat of silk to that same Lord, Çré Gauräìga Hari, who was
dressed in splendid yellow garments. Then he drank the beauty of the Lord through
his eyes.

krameëa so 'rghyädikam eva karma- / vidhänato haratanüruhodgamaiù
ktvä ktajïaù pradadau hareù kare / kanyä samutsjya sarojalocanäm 26
krameëa - one after the other; saù - he; arghya-ädikam - valuable gifts, etc.; eva
- certainly; karma-vidhänataù - according to the standard of that work; hara jubilation; tanü-ruha-udgamaiù - by standing up of his hairs; ktvä - did; kta-jïaù grateful; pradadau - bestowed; hareù - of Lord Hari; kare - in the hand; kanyäm daughter; samutsjya - releasing; saroja-locanäm - lotus-eyed.
He honored the Lord according to the Vedic process of etiquette, beginning with
the offering of arghya (hand-wash) and so forth and the hairs of his body stood erect
out of bliss. Feeling very grateful to Him, Vallabha placed the hand of his lotus-eyed
daughter in the hand of Çré Hari.

tato nivtte 'ti-mahotsave çubhe / lakmé samädäya nijä puré yayau
viçvambharo viçva-bharärti-hä vibhuù / manuya-yänair
anujäbhinandit-aù 27
tataù - then; nivtte - finished; ati-mahotsave - the great festival; çubhe - blissful;
lakmém - Lakmé Devé; samädäya - bringing; nijäm - own; purém - abode; yayau -

[p.112]
He went; viçvambharaù - Lord Viçvambhara; viçva - of the universe; bhara-artihä - destroyer of the burden; vibhuù - sense-controlled, all-pervasive; manuyayänaiù - on palanquins; manuja-abhinanditaù - cheered by the people.
When that great and joyous festival ended, the all-pervasive and sense-controlled
Lord Viçvambhara, who takes away the burden of material existence from all the
worlds, brought Lakñmé Devé to His home. They rode on palanquins and were
applauded by the townsfolk.

Thus ends the Tenth Sarga entitled "Festivities at Gaura's Wedding," in the
First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eleventh Sarga
çré-gauräìga-dhanaïjayaç ca çré-lakñmé-vijayotsava
Gauräìga Travels East for Wealth, and
Celebration of Laksé Devé's Victorious Death

tataù çacé dvija-strébhiù / ktvä sumahad-utsavam
snuä praveçayäm äsa / nija-gehe sa-bhartkäm 1
tataù - then; çacé - Çacé Devé; dvija-strébhiù - with the brähmaëa ladies; ktvä having performed; su-mahat-utsavam - a very great festival; snuäm - daughter-inlaw; praveçayäm äsa - she made enter; nija-gehe - in her own home; sa-bhartkäm
- with her husband.
Then Çacé Mätä, having put on that very great festival with the assistance of the
brähmaëa ladies, welcomed her son and daughter-in-law into her home.

brähmaëebhyo dadäv anna / gandha mälya sa-bhaktitaù

[p.113]
anyebhyaù çilpa-mukhyebhyo / naöebhyaù pradadau dhanam 2
brähmaëebhyaù - to the brähmaëas; dadau - gave; annam - grains; gandham scented oils; mälyam - garlands; sa-bhaktitaù - with devotion; anyebhyaù - to
others; çilpa-mukhyebhyaù - to the chief of the craftsmen; naöebhyaù - to the
dancers; pradadau - bestowed; dhanam - wealth.
With much devotion she gave grains, scented oils and garlands to the brähmaëas.
To the chiefs of the craftsmen, the dancers and others she gave wealth.

tato vasan çubhe gehe / sa-kuöumbaiù sukhé prabhuù
raräja nabhasi svacche / nakatrair iva candramäù 3
tataù - thereafter; vasan - dwelling; çubhe - auspicious; gehe - in the house; sakuöumbaiù - with His family; sukhé - happily; prabhuù - the Lord; raräja - shone;
nabhasi - in the sky; svacche - clear; nakatraiù - with the stars; iva - like;
candramäù - moon.
Then as Prabhu dwelt happily in that auspicious house with His family members,
resembling the moon surrounded by the stars in a clear sky.

lakmé-näräyaëa-dti-mätre sarva-çubhäni hi
äjagmuù çré-çacé-gehe / sva-bhägyäkhyäpanäya ca 4
lakmé-näräyaëa - Çré Çré Lakñmé-Näräyaëa; dti - vision; mätre - simply; sarvaçubhäni - all the qualities of good fortune; hi - indeed; äjagmuù - came; çré-çacégehe - in the home of Çré Çacé Devé; sva-bhägya - their particular opulence;
äkhyäpanäya - to broadcast the fame of; ca - and.
Just by the sight of Çré Çré Lakñmé-Näräyaëa in the home of Çacé Devé, each pf the
personified qualities of good fortune came to reside there just to advertise the fame
of their own opulence.

[p.114]
tato ghäçrame sthitvä / dhanärtha prayayau diçi
pürvasyä sva-janaiù särdha / deçän kurvan sunirmalän 5
tataù - then; gha-äçrame - in householder life; sthitvä - being situated; dhanaartham - in order to gain wealth; prayayau - set forth; diçi - in the direction;
pürvasyäm - in the east; sva-janaiù - with His own men; särdham - together;
deçän - countries; kurvan - making; su-nirmalän - free from contamination.
Since He was now situated in household life, Gaura Hari set forth eastwards with
His associates to acquire wealth, and by so doing He purified those lands.

ya ya deça yayau jiëü / räkä-patiù nibhänanaù
tatra tatraiva tatra-sthä / janä dtvä mudänvitäù 6
yam yam - wherever; deçam - land; yayau - He went; jiëüù - the victorious;
räkä-patiù - moon; nibha - effulgence; änanaù - face; tatra tatra - in those very
places; eva - indeed; tatra-sthäù - the residents; janäù - the people; dtvä - having
seen; muda-anvitäù - filled with joy.
In whichever land the victorious Lord visited, the peole became jubilant to see His
face which appeared radiant like the lord of the night.

paçyanto vadana tasya / tpti-väridhi-päragäù
na babhüvuù striyaç cocuù / kasyäya çuddha-darçanaù 7
mäträsya kena puëyena / dhto garbhe narottamaù
asau vijita-kandarpo / dta-pürvo na hi kvacit 8
paçyantaù - seeing; vadanam - face; tasya - His; tpti - satisfaction; väridhi ocean; päragäù - went to the furthest limit; na - not; babhüvuù - became; striyaù the women; ca - and; ücuù - they said; kasya - whose?; ayam - this; çuddhadarçanaù - whose vision purifies; mäträ - by the mother; asya - of Him; kena - by
what?; puëyena - by pious deeds; dhtaù - held; garbhe - in the womb; narauttamaù - transcendental man; asau - He; vijita - defeated; kam-darpa - Cupid

[p.115]
(kam - lust; darpa - arrogance; dta - seen; purvaù - before; na - not; hi - indeed;
kvacit - at any time.
By seeing that face, men traversed the farthest limits of the ocean of pleasure. But
the women remained unsatiated and they inquired, "Who can be the father of this
person whose very sight purifies the beholder, and O, what pious acts did His
mother perform that within her womb she held such a transcen-dental male? We
have never before seen such a person. Simply by beholding Him, the pride of Cupid
is crushed."

patnétvam asya präptä / kä cirärädhita-çaìkarä
asau näräyaëaù saiva / lakmér eva na saçayaù 9
patnétvam - status of a wife; asya - of Him; präptä - attained; kä - who?; cira - a
long time; ärädhita - worshipped; çaìkarä - Lord Çiva; asau - He; näräyaëaù Lord Näräyaëa; sä - she; eva - certainly; lakméù - Goddess Lakñmé; eva - indeed;
na - not; saçaya - doubt.
"And who is that fortunate woman blessed to become His wife? She must have
worshipped Çaìkara for a very long time." "No,no! Certainly since He is Näräyaëa,
she can be none other than goddess Lakñmé. There is no doubt about this."

eva bahu-vidhä väca / çrutvä tatra janeritäm
äkarëyärdra-dça teä / préti tanvan yayau hariù 10
evam - thus; bahu-vidhäm - many kinds; väcam - words; çrutvä - hearing; tatra there; jana - people; éritäm - spoken; äkarëya - hearing; ärdra-dçam - moist
glance; teäm - of them; prétim - love; tanvat - spreading; yayau - He went; hariù Gaura Hari.
Çré Hari heard many such statements made by the people. The Lord cast His tearmoistened glance of love upon them and continued on His journey.

padmävaté-nadé-tére / gatvä snätvä yathä-vidhi

[p.116]
taträvasat sädhu-janaiù / püjita çraddhayänvitaiù 11
padmavaté-nadé - the river Padmävaté; tére - on the bank; gatvä - went; snätvä bathed; yathä-vidhi - according to etiquette; tatra - there; avasat - dwelt; sädhujanaiù - by saintly men; püjita - worshipped; çraddhayä - with faith; anvitaiù filled with.
After journeying to the bank of the Padmävaté river, He bathed as enjoined in
çästra, and resided there, while saintly men offered Him faithful worship.

gaìgä-tulyä pävané sä / babhüva sumahä-nadé
padmävaté mahä-vegä / mahä-pulina-samyutä 12
gaìgä-tulyä - equal to the Gaìgä; pävané - purifier; sä - she; babhüva - was; sumahä-nadé - a very great river; padmävaté - Padmävaté river; mahä-vegä - very
swift; mahä-pulina-samyutä - endowed with great sand banks.
The Padmävaté is a very great river, equal with the Gaìgä in her potency to purify
conditioned souls. Her waters flow very swiftly and are surround-ed on both sides
by great sand-dunes.

kumbhérair makarair ménair / vidyudbhir iva caïcalair
çobhitä-sajjanäväsa-viräjita-mahat-taöä 13
kumbhéraiù - by crocodiles; makaraiù - by dolphins; ménaiù - by fish;
vidyudbhiù - by lightning; iva - as if; caïcalaiù - by flickering; çobhitä beautified; sat-janä - saintly persons; äväsa - habitation; viräjita - illustrious;
mahat-taöä - great banks.
The great and splendid banks of the Padmävaté, which were the habitation for
saintly folk, were beautified by crocodiles, dolphins and fish which flickered like
lightning within her waters.

[p.117]
viçvambhara-snäna-dhauta-jalaughägha-harä çubhä
mahat-térthatamä sä 'bhüt / tat-tére nivasan hariù 14
viçvambhara-snäna - the bathing of Çré Viçvambhara; dhauta - cleansed; jala water; ogha - flow; agha-harä - sin-remover; çubhä - auspicious; mahat - great;
térthatamä - excellent holy bathing place; sä - she; abhüt - was; tat - her; tére - on
the banks; nivasan - dwelt; hariù - Lord Hari.
When Çré Viçvambhara bathed there, He cleansed away the abundance of
accumulated sins, and thus the Padmavaté became the most excellent and auspicious
of holy rivers. Lord Hari dwelt on her banks.

mahätmanä su-puëyänä / kurvan nayanayoù sukham
mumoda madhu-hätéva / sädhu-darçana-lälasaù 15
mahä-ätmanäm - of the great souls; su-puëyänäm - of the very pure beings;
kurvan - made; nayanayoù - for the eyes; sukham - happiness; mumoda - enjoyed;
madhu-hä - the slayer of Madhu; atéva - intense; sädhu - saints; darçana - sight;
lälasaù - eager.
The Lord is known as Madhu-hä, for in a previous avatära He slew the demon
Madhu who attempted to destroy the Vedas. He, whom saintly persons intensely
hanker to see within their heart of hearts, took pleasure in giving pleasure to the
eyes of those very pure and great-hearted souls.

dayälur anayat svämé / mäsän katipayän vibhuù
päöhayan brähmaëän sarvän / vidyä-rasa-kutühalé 16
dayäluù - merciful; anayat - spent; svämé - master; mäsän - months; katipayän a few; vibhuù - self-controlled; päöhayan - teaching; brähmaëän - the brähmaëas;
sarvän - all; vidyä-rasa - the mellows of scholarship; kutühalé - enthusiastic.
The self-controlled and compassionate Master, eager to taste the mellows of
scholarship, taught all those brähmaëas for a few months.

[p.118]
atha lakmé mahä-bhägä / pati-präëä dhta-vratä
çacyaù çuçrüaëa cakre / päda-samvähanädibhiù 17
atha - then; lakmé - Çré Lakñmé; mahä-bhägä - greatly fortunate; pati-präëä whose life-breath was her husband; dhta-vratä - fixed in her vows; çacyaù - of
Çacé; çuçrüaëam - service; cakre - did; päda-savähana - foot massage; ädibhiù beginning with.
During this interval, the most fortunate Lakñmé Devé, whose husband was dearer to
her than her own life breath, remained firmly fixed in her vows of service. She
served Çacé Devé in many ways, such as massaging her feet.

devatänä ghe lepa-märjana-svastikädikam
dhüpa-dépädi-naivedya / mälya prädät su-sasktam 18
devatänäm - of the Deities; ghe - in the house; lepa - anointment; märjana cleansing; svastika - auspicious designs; etc.; dhüpa - incense; dépä-ädi - ghee
lamps and so on; naivedyam - offering; mälyam - garland; prädät - offered; susasktam - very nicely.
She cleansed and anointed the temple with fragrant oils and decorated the terrace
with svastikas and other auspicious designs. She made very tasteful preparations,
offered them with devotion to the çré-mürtis and then offered incense, lamps and
garlands.

tasyäù sä sevayä väëyä / sauçélyena ca karmaëä
atéva su-cira prétä / çacé pürtim amanyata 19
tasyäù - her; sä - she; sevayä - by service; väëyä - by words; sauçélyena - by
good behavior; ca - and; karmaëä - by activities; atéva - very; su-ciram - very
long; prétä - pleased; çacé - Çacé; pürtim - reward; amanyata - thought.

[p.119]
Çacé Devé, much pleased by Lakñmé's services, her speech, her gentle behavior, and
her thoughtful deeds, pondered for a long time of some way to reward her.

vadhü sutasyänyatamä / snehodgata-tanüruhä
kanyäm iva sneha-vaçäl / lälayanté sva-putravat 20
vadhüm - bride; sutasya - of her son; anyatamäm - most unique; sneha affection; udgata-tanüruhä - hairs standing erect; kanyäm - daughter; iva - as if;
sneha-vaçät - controlled by affection; lälayanté - cherisher; sva-putra-vat - as if
her own son.
Her hairs would thrill out of intense affection for her son's bride, and she
cherished her like a daughter, doting on her just as she did her son.

eva sthitä ghe käle / daiväd ägatya kuëòalé
adaçat päda-müle tä / lakmém älakya sma çacé 21
vyajijïapat mahä-bhéti-yuktä jäìgalikän snuäm
samänéyäkarod yatna / tad viasya pramärjane 22
evam - thus; sthitä - situated; ghe - in the house; käle - at the time; daivät - by
Providence; ägatya - coming; kuëòalé - a snake; adaçat - bit; päda-müle - on the
sole of her foot; täm - her; lakmém - Çré Lakmé; älakya - observing; sma - did; çacé
- Çacé Devé; vyajijïapat - made known; mahä-bhéti - in great anxiety; yuktä filled with; jäìgalikän - snake-doctors; snuäm - daughter-in-law; samänéya gathering; akarot - made; yatnam - attempt; tat - the snake; viasya - of the
poison; pramärjane - cleansing.
Once while she was thus residing in Çacé's home, a snake came, incited by Divine
Providence, and bit Lakñmé Devé on the sole of her foot. Seeing this, Çacé Devé felt
great anxiety for her daughter-in-law and immediate-ly called for doctors
specializing in snake-bites, who came and endeavored to flush out the poison.

[p.120]
çacé mantrair bahu-vidhair / näbhüt tad-via-märjanam
tataù käla-kta matvä / samänéya prayatnataù 23
çacé - Çacé Devé; mantraiù - with mantras; bahu-vidhaiù - many kinds; na - not;
abhüt - was; tat-via - poison of the snake; märjanam - purify; tataù - then; kälaktam - enacted by time; matvä - thought; samänéya - brought; prayatnataù - with
endeavors.
Although Çacé Devé chanted mantras and applied many other remedies, she was
unable to alleviate the effects of the snake's poison. Therefore she considered her
daughter-in-law's death to be an act of the almighty Lord in His form of Time.

jahnu-kanyä-payo-madhye / tulasé-däma-bhüitäm
ktvä vadhü saha strébhiç / cakära hari-kértanam 24
jahnu-kanyä - the daughter of Jahnu, the Gaìgä; payaù-madhye - in the middle
of the water; tulasé-däma - a garland of tulasé leaves; bhüitäm - decorated with;
ktvä - did; vadhüm - young wife; saha - together with; strébhiù - with the women;
cakära - made; hari-kértanam - chanting of the names of Hari.
She arranged that the Lord's young wife be decorated with a garland of tulasé
leaves and placed in the waters of the daughter of Jahnu. Then, accompanied by
other ladies, she chanted the names of Hari.

äyäte vimale vyomni / gandharva-ratha-saìkule
brahmädibhir yoga-siddhair / géyamäne su-maìgale 25
äyäte - having entered; vimale - cloudless; vyomni - sky; gandharva-rathasaìkule - in a host of Gandharva airships; brahmä-ädibhiù - by Lord Brahmä and
other gods; yoga-siddhaiù - with the perfected beings; géyamäne - sung; sumaìgale - very auspicious.
Then as a host of Gandharva airships entered that clear sky, the devas headed by

[p.121]
Lord Brahmä and accompanied by perfect beings, recited the following auspicious
song:

mahä-lakmér jagan-mätä / gantu sva-prabhu-sannidhau
smtvä këa-padämbhoja / svar-nadyä deham atyajat 26
mahä-lakmé - the original goddess of fortune; jagat-mätä - mother of all living
entities; gantum - to go; sva-prabhu-sannidhau - into the presence of Her Lord;
smtvä - remembering; këa-pada-ambhojam - the lotus feet of Kåñëa; sva-nadyäm in the river that descends from the heavens; deham - body; atyajat - she gave up.
"Mahä-Lakñmé, mother of the cosmos, has given up her body within the celestial
Gaìgä, while remembering the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa, in order to reenter presence
of her Master.

tato jagäma nilayam / ätmanaç ca suçobhanam
indrädibhir agamya ca / sarva-maìgala-rüpakam 27
lakmyä paramayä yuktä / lakmé loka-namasktam 28
tata - then; jagäma - she went; nilayam - abode; ätmana - her own; ca - and; suçobhanam - very beautiful; indra-ädibhi - by Indra and the other gods; agamyam unattainable; ca - and; sarva-maìgala-rüpakam - form filled with all
auspiciousness; lakmyä - with opulence; paramayä - transcendental; yuktä possessed; lakmé - Lakñmé Devé; loka-nama-ktam - offered honor by all worlds;
iti - thus.
"Then she departed for her resplendent abode, the form of which is full of
auspiciousness and which is unattainable even by Indra and the other devas. There
in that planet which is worshipped by all other planets, Çré Lakñmé is replete with
transcendental opulence."

Thus ends the Eleventh Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Travels East for Wealth, and
Celebration of Laksé Devé's Victorious Death," the First Prakrama of the great

[p.122]
poem Çré Kåñëa-Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Twelfth Sarga
çacé-çokäpanodanam
Gauräìga Dispells the Grief of Mother Çacé

atha tä vilaläpa duùkhitä / sva-vadhü dharma-paräyaëä çacé
vigalan nayanämbu-dhärayä / stanayoù kälanam eva säkarot 1
täm - her; vilaläpa - lamented; duùkhitä - unhappy; sva-vadhüm - her own
daughter-in-law; dharma-paräyaëäm - dedicated to virtue; çacé - Çacé Devé;
vigalan - trickling; nayana-ambu - tears; dhärayä - with the flow; stanayoù - - on
her breasts; kälanam - washing; eva - indeed; sä - she; akarot - did.
Çacé lamented sorrowfully for her dear daughter-in-law who was so dedicated to
dharma, and the streams of tears flowing from her eyes bathed her breasts.

avadad bhujagädhama tvayä / kim ida karma durätmanä kta
vikaöair daçanaiù katha na mäm / adaças tva hi vihäya me snuäm 2
avadat - she said; bhujaga - O snake; adhama - most vile; tvayä - by you; kim why; idam - this; karma - deed; durätmanä - by evil being; ktam - done; vikaöaiù terrible; daçanaiù - teeth; katham - how; na - not; mäm - me; adaçaù - you bit;
tvam - you; hi - surely; vihäya - leaving aside; me - my; snuäm - daughter-in-law.
She cried, "O most vile and vicious serpent! For what reason have you done this
deed? Why did you not bite me with your terrible teeth and leave aside my daughterin-law?

[p.123]
viniyujya vadhü nievaëe / mama putro gatavän sudharmikaù
dhana-dhänya-samarjanäya me / hy anteväsi-janaiù susamvtaù 3
viniyujya - engaging; vadhüm - wife; nievaëe - in service; mama - my; putraù son; gatavän - gone; su-dharmikaù - so virtuous; dhana-dhänya - wealth and
grains; samarjanäya - in order to earn; me - my; hi - indeed; ante-väsi-janaiù - by
His students; su-samvtaù - fully surrounded.
"My dharmic son departed for foreign lands accompanied by His students to earn
gold and grains and engaged his wife in my service.

tad ida vadana katha snuä / parihénä tanayasya paçyatu
iti vilapya bhça çucäkulä / kulavatém apahäya samädiçat 4
tat - that; idam - this; vadanam - face; katham - how?; snuä - daughter-in-law;
parihénä - bereft; tanayasya - of my son; paçyatu - I may see; iti - thus; vilapya lamenting; bhçam - intensely; çuca-akulä - agitated with grief; kulavatém - lady of
the family; apahäya - the quitting; samädiçat - informed.
"Now bereft of my daughter-in-law, how can I look my son in the face?" Çacé
lamented intensely at the passing away of her dear daughter-in-law. Being agitated
by grief, she instructed her relatives and friends:

kuru nija kula-yogya-sat-kriyäm / akarot sva-svajanas tv anantaram
nija-gha samagät parideva-lola-nayanayoù parimucya jalam 5
kuru - do; nijam - your own; kula-yogya - beneficial for the family; sat-kriyäm pure activities; akarot - performed; sva-sva-janaù - her various relatives; tu indeed; anantaram - thereafter; nija-gham - to their own homes; samagät - they
went; parideva - grief; lola - agitated; nayanayoù - from their eyes; parimucya released; jalam - water.

[p.124]
"Please perform the required family purificatory rituals." And they all did so. But
as Çacé departed for her home tears dropped continuously from her restless eyes.

sva-jana-bandhubhir äçu vibodhitä / sthiravaté sukhiteva cira çacé
svasya putra-vadana smaraté sä / këa-näma-paripürëa-mukhäsét 6
sva-jana - relatives; bandhubhiù - with friends; äçu - swiftly; vibodhitä awakened; sthiravaté - firm; sukhitä - happiness; iva - as if; ciram - at last; çacé Çacé Devé; svasya - of her own; putra - son; vadanam - face; smaraté - she
remembers; sä - she; këa - Çré Kåñëa; näma - name; paripürëa - completely full;
mukha - mouth; asét - it was.
At once her friends and relatives gave her comforting care, and after a long time
Çacé Devé apparently became awakened to stable and happy consciousness. She
would remember the face of her son, and her mouth was always filled with the
names of Kåñëa.

atha kiyad divasät pariharitaù / parama-sädhubhir eva nivedanam
rajata-käïcana-cela-samanvitam / samanayat sva-gha
parameçvaraù 7
atha - then; kiyat - so many; divasät - after days; pariharitaù - jubilant; paramasädhubhiù - by the great saints; eva - indeed; nivedanam - presentation; rajata silver; käïcana - gold; cela-samanvitam - with garments; samanayat - brought;
sva-gham - own home; parama-éçvaraù - Supreme Lord.
Meanwhile, after the Parameçvara passed many days very gladly in the company of
those great saintly persons, He returned, bringing their gifts of silver, gold, and fine
garments back to His home.

atha nirékya çacé sutam ägata / sapadi pürëa-niçäkara-samaprabham
na manasäti-tutoa bahu-vyathä / hdi vahanty agamat snuñayärpitäm

[p.125]
8
atha - then; nirékya - seeing; çacé - Çacé Devé; sutam - son; ägatam - come;
sapadi - suddenly; pürëa-niçäkara - full moon; sama-prabham - equal effulgence;
na - not; manasä - in the mind; ati-tutoa - was very satisfied; bahu-vyathäm great agitation; hdi - in the heart; vahanti - in carrying; agamat - went; snuñayä on account of her daughter-in-law; arpitäm - placed.
When Çacé suddenly saw her son arriving one day, His effulgence bright as the full
moon, her heart was not content but rather filled with the great anguish of
separation from her daughter-in-law.

atha nirékya çacé kamalekaëaù / parinipatya padoù pada-reëukam
çirasi savidadhe janané-mukha / vimalina sa nirékya suvismitaù 9
atha - then; nirékya - seeing; çacém - Çacé Devé; kamalä-ékaëaù - the lotus-eyed
one; parinipatya - having fallen down; padoù - at her feet; pada - feet; reëukam dust; çirasi - on the head; savidadhe - placed; janané-mukha - His mother's face;
vimalinam - pure; sa - He; nirékya - seeing; su-vismitaù - very surprised.
Upon seeing Çacé Devé, the lotus-eyed Lord fell at her feet, took the dust from her
feet and placed it on His head, but when He looked into His mother's pure face, He
became mystified.

smita-sudhokitayä ca giränagho / yad adhilabdha-dhana
susamarpayan
samavadad vada mätar ala mukha / virasam eva tavädya katha
snuñä 10
smita - smile; sudhä - nectar; ukitayä - by sprinkling; ca - and; girä - by words;
anaghaù - the sinless; yat - which; adhilabdha - obtained; dhanam - wealth; susamarpayan - nicely offering; samavadat - said; vada - please speak; mäta - O
mother; alam - enough; mukham - face; vi-rasam - dry; eva - indeed; tava - your;

[p.126]
adya - today; katham - how?; snuñä - daughter-in-law.
The sinless Lord sprinkled the nectar of His smile and words upon her, and after
presenting to her whatever wealth He had gained, said, "O Mä! Do not keep this sad
face. Tell Me! How is your daughter-in-law today?"

iti sudhä-vacasä muditä çacé / vara-vadhü-smti-sanna-girävadat
sakalam eva vadhü-kathana hdä / parigalan nayanämbujabindhubhiù 11
iti - thus; sudhä-vacasä - with nectarean words; muditä - happy; çacé - Çacé;
vara-vadhü - beautiful lady; smti - remembrance; sanna - dejected; girä - by
words; avadat - she said; sakalam - all; eva - indeed; vadhü-kathanam - narration
of His wife; hdä - from her heart; parigalan - trickling; nayana - eyes; ambu-ja lotus; bindhubhiù - by the drops.
Çacé Mätä, although made happy by Viçvambhara's words of nectar, spoke in
dejected accents as she thought of Gaura's excellent wife. Then from the depths of
her heart, she narrated to Him the whole story of His wife's departure from this
world as teardrops trickled from her lotus eyes.

on earth

äçu cärdra-dçäpi cämbikäyäù / çoka-hara-paripürita-dehaù
iti niçamya vaco madhusüdanaù / samavadat karuëärdradçämbikäm 12
äçu - quickly; ca - and; ärdra-dçä - by the wet eyes; api - although; ca - and;
ambikäyäù - of His mother; çoka - grief; hara - jubilation; paripürita experienced; dehaù - the body; iti - thus; niçamya - hearing; vacaù - words;
madhu-südanaù - the slayer of the demon of doubt (Madhu); samavadat eloquently said; karuëä - compassion; ärdra-dçä - with a moistened glance;
ambikäm - mother.

[p.127]
Because His mother was weeping, Gauräìga's body also quickly became suffused
with grief as well as joy. After hearing her words, He who is renowned as the slayer
of the demon of doubt, addressed His mother with eyes moist with compassion.

ätma-gopana-balair vacanais tad / gopayan hi sakala jagadéçaù
çëu yatheyam avätarad apsarä / sura-vadhüù pthivém anu
sämpratam 13
ätma - His true self; gopana-balaiù - with the power of concealing; vacanaiù with words; tat - that; gopayan - hiding; hi - indeed; sakalam - all; jagat-éçaù Lord of all living entities; çëu - please hear; yathä - as; iyam - this; avätarat descended; apsarä - heavenly dancer; sura-vadhüù - maiden of the gods; pthivém earth; anu - after; sämpratam - presently.
Then the master of all living beings spoke in such a way as to conceal from His
mother the fact of His own divinity. He said, "Hear from me about the true situation.
Actually Lakñmé was formerly an apsarä, who recently descended to the earth.

maghavataù sadaséndu-nibhänanä / skhalita-ntya-padä vidhinä
kaëam
samavalokya çaçäpa sureçvaro / bhava narasya sutety avadhärya
tat 14
maghavataù - of the liberal one (Indra); sadasi - in the assembly; indu-nibha like the moon; änanäm - face skhalita - slipped; ntya-padäm - dancing feet;
vidhinä - by the will of Providence; kaëam - momentarily; samavalokya observing; çaçäpa - he cursed; sura-éçvaraù - the lord of the gods; bhava - be;
narasya - of a man; sutä - daughter; iti - thus; avadhärya - ascertained; tat - that.
"It is known that once, while she was dancing amidst the assembly hall of the
liberal Indra-deva, the feet of that apsarä whose face was luminous like the moon
slipped for one moment and thus she disrupted the rhythmic synopation of the
dance. Noticing this, the sureçvara cursed her, saying, `Take birth as the daughter of
a man on earth!'

[p.128]
samapatat padayor iti tä punaù / sakala-nätha-vadhü bhava
çobhane
punar ihäbhisukha sura-durlabha / samanubhüya hareù padam
ujjvalam 15
samapatat - she fell down; padayoù - at his feet; iti - thus; täm - to her; punaù again; sakala-nätha-vadhü - wife of the Lord of all; bhava - may you become;
çobhane - beautiful woman; punaù - again; iha - here; abhisukham - great
happiness; sura-durlabham - hard to obtain even for the gods; samanubhüya having experienced; hareù - of Hari; padam - the feet; ujjvalam - dazzling.
"She fell at the feet of Indra and he spoke further, `O beauteous one! Thereafter
you shall become the wife of the Lord of all beings, and experience the immense
happiness of the abode of Çré Hari whch is rarely achieved by the gods.

bata gamiyasi gaccha suçobhane / sura-pater vacasäti-mumoda sä
sura-nadé-salile parimucya tam / tridaça-çäpaja-päpam athägamat
16
bata - indeed; gamiyasi - you shall proceed; gaccha - now go; su-çobhane - O
beauteous one!; sura-pateù - from the master of the gods; vacasä - by the
statement; ati-mumoda - took great pleasure; sä - she; sura-nadé - the river which
is bathed in by the gods; salile - in the water; parimucya - fully liberated; tam that; tridaça-çäpa-ja-päpam - sin born of the curse of Indra; atha - then; agamat she went.
"`Now go, most lovely lady!' Hearing this statement from the lord of the gods, the
maiden became very joyous. Now to free herself from the sinful contamination born
of Indra's curse, she has bathed in the water of the gods and departed for for the
Lord's abode.

kimvä lakmé-rüpä jagad-éçvaré / nija-prabhu-caraëäbjam agät

[p.129]
svayam
tad alam eva çucä bhavitavyatä / bhavati käla-kta sakala jagat 17
kimvä - in other words; jagat-éçvaré - the goddess of the universe; eva certainly;lakmé-rüpä - in the form of Lakñmé; agät - has gone; svayam - of her
own accord; (to) nija - her own; prabhu - Master's; caraëa-abjam - lotus feet; tat therefore; alam - enough; çucä - with sorrow; bhavitavyatä - fate; jagat - the
universe; bhavati - is; käla-ktam - controlled by time; sakalam - all.
"In other words, that apsarä accepted the form of Lakñmé Devé. She has now
departed by her own wish for the shelter of Lord Hari's lotus feet. Therefore let your
lamention be finished. Divine destiny will surely take its course, for the entire
universe is controlled by the influence of the almighty Lord in His form of Time."

iti niçamya çacé sutasya tad-vacanam indu-mukhasya çuca jahau
prakaöa-vaibhava-gopana-käraëa / manuja-bhäva-dharasya hares
tatam 18
iti - thus; niçamya - hearing; çacé - Çacé Mätä; sutasya - of her son; tat-vacanam words about the apsarä; indu-mukhasya - of the moon-faced; çucam lamentation; jahau - gave up; prakaöa - manifest; vaibhava - power; gopana concealing; käraëam - cause; manuja-bhäva - mood of a man; dharasya - of He
who is bearing; hareù - of Çré Hari; tatam - expanded.
Upon hearing these words from her son, whose face shone like the moon, Çacé
Mätä gave up her lamentation. Thus having accepted the role of a human being, Çré
Hari acted in such a way as to conceal from His mother His supreme position.

na khalu citram ida bhagavän svaya / sura-kathä-vacana ktavän hi
yat
yad anubhäva-rasena pitä-mahaù / sjati hanti jagat-traya éçvaraù
19

[p.130]
na - not; khalu - indeed; citram - wonderful; idam - this; bhagavän - opulent
Lord; svayam - Himself; sura-kathä-vacanam - words spoken by Indra; ktavän done; hi - indeed; yat - which; yat - which; anubhäva-rasena - by His mellows of
influence; pitä-mahaù - great father (Brahmä); sjati - creates; hanti - destroys;
jagat-trayam - three worlds; éçvaraù - the controller (çiva).
Indeed it is not astonishing that Gaura Hari pacified Çacé Devé by telling this story
of Indra's curse on the apsarä. For by Çré Hari's rasa of influence He motivates
Brahmä to create the three worlds and Çiva to destroy them.

Thus ends the Twelfth Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Dispells the Grief of Mother
Çacé," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Thirteenth Sarga
sanätana-vimohana-lélä
Gaura Causes Bewilderment to Çré Sanätana Paëita

athävasan ghe ramye / mäträ sajjana-bandhubhiù
mumoda ca suraiù särdha / yathädityä purandaraù 1
atha - then; avasan - dwelling; ghe - in his home; ramye - charming; mäträ with mother; sajjana-bandhubhiù - with friends and kinsmen; mumoda enjoyed; ca - and; suraiù - with the demigods; särdham - with; yathä - as; adityä the Adityas; puram-daraù - Lord Indra.
Thereafter Çré Gaura dwelt in His charming home, enjoying life with His mother,
friends and relatives, like Indra amongst the sons of Adité.

tataù çacé cintayitvä / vivähärtha sutasya sä

[p.131]
käçénätha dvija-sreöha / präha gacchasva sämpratam 2
çrémat-sanätana vipra / paëòita dharmiëä varam
vadasva mama puträya / sutä dätu yathä-vidhi 3
tataù - then; çacé - Çacé Devé; cintayitvä - thought; viväha-artham - the purpose
of marriage; sutasya - of her son; sä - she; käçé-nätham dvija-sretham - an exalted
brähmaëa of the name Käçénätha; präha - said; gacchasva - go; sämpratam - now;
çrimat-sanätanam - Çré Sanätana; vipram - mystic; paëòitam - scholar; dharmiëäm
- of virtuous men; varam - best; vadasva - say; mama - my; puträya - to my son;
sutäm - daughter; dätum - to give; yathä-vidhi - according to scriptural
injunctions.
After consideration, Çacé Devé deemed it necessary that her son marry again. Thus
addressing an elevated brähmaëa named Käçénätha, she said to him, "Kindly
approach the best among dharmic brähmaëa-paëits Çré Sanätana, and request him to
offer his daugher to my son in sanctified marriage."

tac chrutvä vacana tasyäù / käçé-nätha-dvijottamaù
nyavedayat tat sakala / paëòitäya mahätmane 4
tat - that; çrutvä - having heard; vacanam - words; tasyäù - her; käçé-näthadvija-uttamaù - Käçénätha, the excellent brähmaëa; nyavedayat - told; tat - that;
sakalam - all; paëòitäya - to the scholar; mahätmane - to the great soul.
That exalted brähmaëa, Käçénätha Miçra, after hearing the instructions of Çacé
Devé, went and told all this to that paëit-mahätmä, Çré Sanätana.

gaccha tva dvija-çärddüla / kartavya yat prayojanam
samaya nirëaya ktvä / praheyamo dvijottamam 5
gaccha - go; tvam - you; dvija-çärddüla - O eminent brähmaëa; kartavyam ought to be done; yat - what; prayojanam - necessity; samayam - time; nirëayam determination; ktvä - done; praheyamaù - we shall send; dvija-uttamam - the

[p.132]
great brähmaëa.
Käçénätha Miçra said, "O tiger amongst the twice-born. Go. Arrange whatever is
necessary to be done, and when you fix the date, we shall send forth dvijottama Çré
Gauräìga."

tac chrutvä sakala patnyä / vimya bandhubhiù saha
kartavyam etan niçcitya / käçénätham athäbravét 6
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; sakalam - all; patnyä - with his wife; vimya considering; bandhubhiù - with his kinsmen; saha - with; kartavyam - should be
done; etat - that; niçcitya - having determined; käçé-nätham - to Käçénätha; atha then; abravét - said.
Hearing all this, Sanätana deliberated amongst his wife and kinsmen. After
deciding that it was indeed a worthy proposal, he informed Käçénätha Miçra.

çrutvettha vacana tasya / samägamya yathoditam
çacyai nyavedayat sarva / tataù sä haritäbhavat 7
çrutvä - hearing; ittham - thus; vacanam - words; samägamya - came; yathä - as;
uditam - it happened; çacyai - to Çacé Devé; nyavedayat - told; sarvam - all; tataù then; sä - she; haritä - joyous; abhavat - became.
Käçénätha heard about the proposed arrangements, then returned and reported all
to Çacé. This news made her very happy.

tataù kälena kiyatä / paëòitaù çré-sanätanaù
çuddhaù sväcära-nirato / vaiëavo loka-pälakaù 8
tataù - then; kälena kiyatä - after some time; paëòitaù - the scholar; çrésanätanaù - Çré Sanätana; çuddhaù - pure; su-äcära-nirataù - attached to good
conduct; vaiëavaù - devotee of Viñëu; loka-pälakaù - protector of the people.

[p.133]
The learned scholar Çré Sanätana was a man of pure consciousness, attached to
good behavior, and devoted to Lord Viñëu. He provided charitable maintenance to
all people.

dayälur ätitheyaç ca / suçélaù priya-väk çuciù
prähiëod brähmaëa kiïcit / samägatyänamat çacém 9
dayäluù - merciful; ätitheyaù - hospitable to guests who arrived at any hour; ca
- and; su-çélaù - virtuous; priya-väk - who spoke in kind words; çuciù - clean;
prähiëot - sent; brähmaëam - one who understands brahman; kiïcit - a certain;
samägatya - having arrived; anamat - bowed; çacém - to Çacé.
He was mercifully hospitable to guests, wheher expected or not, no matter what
hour they might arrive. He was virtuous, gentle of speech and clean. After some time
he sent a certain brähmaëa who came before Çacé Devé and bowed to her.

präha tä tava puträya / paëòitäya mahätmane
sutä sarva-guëair yuktä / rüpaudärya-samänvitäm 10
dätu prärthayate sädhvi / paëòitaù çré-sanätanaù
tataù pramuditä sädhvé / çacé väkyam athädade 11
präha - he said; täm - to her; tava - your; puträya - to your son; paëòitäya - the
scholar; mahä-ätmane - to the great soul; sutäm - daughter; sarva-guëaiù - with
all good qualities; yuktäm - endowed; rüpa - beauty; audärya - magnanimity;
samänvitäm - filled with; dätum - to give; prärthayate - prays; sädhvé - O saintly
lady; paëòitaù - the scholar; çré-sanätanaù - Çré Sanätana; tataù - then; pramuditä overjoyed; sädhvé - the saintly lady; çacé - Çacé Mätä; väkyam - words; atha then; ädade - accepted.
That brähmaëa said to her, "O saintly lady, the learned scholar named Çré Sanätana
prays that he may present his daughter Çrématé Viëu-priyä to your son, the great
soul and learned scholar, Çré Viçvambhara. She is endowed with all fine qualities,

[p.134]
filled with beauty and magnanimity." Then the saintly Çacé, overjoyed, consented to
Çré Sanätana's request.

mamaiva sammato nitya / sambandhaù sad-guëäçrayaù
kartavyam etan niyata / çubha-kälam athäha tam 12
mama - my; eva - certainly; sammataù - approved; nityam - always;
sambandhaù - relationship; sat-guëa-äçrayaù - the shelter of pure qualities;
kartavyam - should be done; etat - this; niyatam - with restraint; çubha-kälam at an auspicious time; atha - then; äha - she said; tam - him.
She replied, "This relationship has the shelter of all divine qualities and will
always have my approval. It should be performed with restraint at an auspicious
moment."

tato hto dvija-çretho / 'vadan madhurayä girä
viëu-priyä pati präpya / tava putra çriyänvitam 13
tataù - thus; htaù - jubilant; dvija-çrethaù - the best of brähmaëas; avadat said; madhurayä - with sweet; girä - words; viëu-priyä - Çrématé Viëu-priyä;
patim - husband; präpya - getting; tava - your; putram - son; çriyä - with beauty;
anvitam - filled.
Then the jubilant and exalted brähmaëa spoke sweetly, "By attaining your son as
her husband, Viñëu-priyä's beauty will be complete.

yathärtha-nämni bhavatu / çrémad-viçvambharaù prabhuù
täm uvähya yathä këo / rukmiëé präpya nirvtaù 14
tathä nirvtim äpnotu / satyam etad vadämi te
iti dvijendra-vacana / çrutvä haränvitä çacé 15
yathä - as it is; artha - meaning; nämni - in the name; bhavatu - it must be;

[p.135]
çrémat-viçvambharaù - the resplendent Viçvambhara; prabhuù - Lord; täm - her;
uvähya - marrying; yathä - just as; këaù - Çré Kåñëa; rukmiëém - Rukmiëé Devé;
präpya - getting; nirvtaù - happy; tathä - so; nirvtim - happiness; äpnotu - must
get; satyam - truth; etat - this; vadämi - I say; te - to you; iti - thus; dvija-indra excellent brähmaëa; vacanam - words; çrutvä - hearing; hara - joy; anvitä - filled
with; çacé - Çacé Devé.
"And Viçvambhara will now fulfill His name's meaning as the sustainer of the
universe. Just as Çré Kåñëa became content to receive Rukmiëé as His bride, so will
Viçvambhara taste delight. I assure you that this is the truth!" Çacé Devé became
filled with joy to hear this statement by that great brähmaëa, .

dvijaç ca gatvä tat sarvam / paëòitäya nyavedayat
tato haränvito bhütvä / paëòitaù çré-sanätanaù 16
dvijaù - the brähmaëa; ca - and; gatvä - having departed; tat - that; sarvam all; paëòitäya - to the scholar; nyavedayat - told; tataù - then; hara-anvitaù filled with bliss; bhütvä - became; paëòitaù - the scholar; çré-sanätanaù - Çré
Sanätana.
The brähmaëa returned and told all that had happened to the Paëita, who also
became filled with delight.

sarva-dravyädy-alaìkäram / äharat satvara kté
tataù sa samaya jïätvä / 'dhiväsa kartum udyate 17
sarva-dravya - all materials; ädi - and so forth; alaìkäram - decorations; äharat
- fetched; sa-tvaram - with speed; kté - who had accomplished his desire; tataù then; saù - he; samayam - time; jïätvä - knowing; adhiväsam - preliminary
marriage rituals; kartum - to do; udyate - prepared.
Considering that all his desires were fufilled, Sanätana quickly assembled all
necessary paraphernalia and ornaments. Then having determined an auspicious
moment, he prepared for the adhiväsa ceremony.

[p.136]
tato gaëaka ägatya / proväca vinayänvitaù
mayäbhyetya pathi mudä / çrémad-viçvambharaù prabhuù 18
döaù ptaç ca bhagavan / adhiväsas tavänagha
vivähasyädya ki tatra / vilambas täta dçyate 19
tataù - then; gaëakaù - the astrologer; ägatya - arriving; proväca - declared;
vinaya-anvitaù - filled with humility; mayä - by me; abhyetya - coming; pathi on the path; mudä - happily; çrémat-viçvambharaù - beautiful Viçvambhara;
prabhuù - Lord; döaù - seen; ptaù - questioned; ca - and; bhagavan - O Lord;
adhiväsaù - household-making; tava - Your; anagha - O sinless one; vivähasya of the marriage; adya - today; kim - why?; tatra - there; vilambaù - delay; täta dear boy; dçyate - it is seen.
Then the astrologer arrived and spoke in a submissive tone, "As I was coming here,
I saw handsome Viçvambhara on the path and I inquired from him, `O sinless Lord,
what of the adhiväsa ceremony today? My dear boy, It appears that You are making
some delay.'

tac chrutvä präha mä devo / räjat-smera-mukhämbujaù
kutaù kasya vivähas te / viditas tad vadasva me 20
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; präha - He said; mäm - me; devaù - the Lord; räjat shining; smera - Cupid; mukha - face; ambu-jaù - lotus; kutaù - where?; kasya whose?; vivähaù - marriage; te - your; viditaù - known; tat - that; vadasva - tell;
me - to me.
"Hearing that, He whose shining lotus face resembles Cupid, replied, `Where will
this marriage of which you speak take place, and with whom? Please tell me if you
know.'

iti çrutvä mayä tasya / vacana tava sannidhau
samägata niçamyaitad / yad yukta tat samäcara 21

[p.137]
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; mayä - by my; tasya - His; vacanam - words; tava your; sannidhau - in your presence; samägatam - come; niçamya - hearing; etat this; yat - what; yuktam - appropriate; tat - that; samäcara - do.
"After hearing these words of His, I have come to you. Now that you have heard
this, please do what is necessary."

iti çrutvä vacas tasya / gaëakasya su-duùkhitaù
çrémat-sanätano dhairyam / avalambyäbravéd vacaù 22
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; vacaù - words; tasya - his; gaëakasya - of the
astrologer; su-duùkhitaù - very pained; çrémat-sanätanaù - Çré Sanätana;
dhairyam - patience; avalambya - summoning; abravét - said; vacaù - words.
Hearing these words from the astrologer, Çré Sanätana became very pained.
Clinging to his patience, he said:

kta mayaitat sakala / dravyälaìkaraëäni ca
tathäpi tasya na taträdaro bhü-daiva-doataù 23
ktam - done; mayä - by me; etat - this; sakalam - all; dravya - materials;
alaìkaraëäni - decorations; ca - and; tathäpi - however; tasya - His; na - not;
tatra - there; ädaraù - respect; bhü-daiva-doataù - by faults of my brähminical
qualities.
"I have arranged all the paraphernalia, ingredients and ornaments. However, it
appears that because of some fault in my qualities as a brähmaëa, the Lord is not
honoring His agreement.

mamätra ki mayä kärya / näparädhyämi kutracit
tataù santrasta-hdayä / patné tasya çucé-vratä 24
kulajä viëu-bhaktä ca / pati-sevä-paräyaëä

[p.138]
abravéd duùkhitä duùkha-yukta paëòita-sattamam 25
mama - my; atra - here; kim - what?; mayä - by me; käryam - duty; na - not;
aparädhyämi - I offend; kutracit - in any way; tataù - then; santrasta-hdayä frightened heart; patné - wife; tasya - his; çucé-vratä - devoted to cleanliness; kulajä - born of a pure family; viëu-bhaktä - devotee of Lord Viñëu; ca - and; patisevä-paräyaëä - dedicated to her husband's service; abravét - said; duùkhitä sorrowfully; duùkha-yuktam - absorbed in grief; paëòita - scholar; sattamam noble.
"What duty have I not performed? Have I offended Him in some way?" Then
trembling with alarm, his wife, who was virtuous in conduct, born of a pure family,
devoted to Lord Viñëu and dedicated to the service of her husband, spoke sadly to
that noble scholar who was afflicted with grief:

pati pati-vratä väkya / na karoti yadä svayam
çrémad-viçvambharo näträ / 'parädho me katha bhavän 26
patim - husband; pati-vratä - faithful to her husband; väkyam - words; na - not;
karoti - he does; yadä - when; svayam - of His own accord; çrémat-viçvambhara the resplendent maintainer of the universe; na - not; atra - here; aparädhaù offense; me - of me; katham - how?; bhavän - your good self.
"If Çrémad Viçvambhara does not wish to marry of His own accord, then there is no
offense made on the part of your honor.

duùkhitaù kintu näsmäbhir / vaktavya kiïcid aëv api
käryam etan na kartavya / tyaja duùkha sukhé bhava 27
duùkhitaù - distressed; kintu - however; na - not; asmäbhiù - by us; vaktavyam to be spoken; kiïcit - something; aëu - very small; api - even; käryam - proper to
be done; etat - this; na - not; kartavyam - should be done; tyaja - give up;
duùkham - sorrow; sukhé - happy; bhava - become.

[p.139]
"My lord, although we are distressed, still we should not say even a word in
protest. This is not the proper thing to do. Give up your sorrow and be satisfied."

iti tasyä vacaù çrutvä / priyäyäù prétim ävahan
uväca bandhubhiù särdham / etad eva suniçcitam 28
näkarod yadi viprendro / na kariyäma eva hi
tato 'sau bhagavän jïätvä / duùkhitau dvija-dampaté 29
roeëa lajjayä yuktau / viëu-bhaktau vimatsarau
brähmaëyo bhagavän devas / tayor duùkham aväharat 30
iti - thus; tasyä - her; vacaù - words; çrutvä - hearing; priyäyäù - of his dear
wife; prétim - love; ävahan - bore; uväca - said; bandhubhiù - with his kinsmen;
särdham - together; etat - this; eva - surely; su-niçcitam - very clear; na - not;
akarot - He did; yadi - if; vipra-indraù - the best of vipras; na - not; kariyämaù we shall do; eva - certainly; hi - indeed; tataù - then; asau - He; bhagavän - the
Lord; jïätvä - knew; duùkhitau - the sorrowful couple; dvija-dam-paté brähmaëa wife and husband; roeëa - by anger; lajjayä - by shame; yuktau engaged; viëu-bhaktau - the two devotees of Lord Viñëu; vimatsarau - nonenvious; brähmaëyaù - inclined to the brähmaëas; bhagavän - the all-opulent
Lord; devaù - God; tayoù - of the two; duùkham - grief; aväharat - took away.
Hearing these words from his dear wife, which brought him increased love for her,
he counseled with his kinsmen, saying, "It is very clear that if this great vipra does
not accept my daughter in marriage, then we shall certainly not offer her to Him."
Then, knowing that the non-envious vaiñëava-brähmaëa couple were grief-stricken
and afflicted with anger and shame, the all-opulent Personality of Godhead, who is
always favorably inclined toward brähmaëas, took away the grief of that devoted
couple.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Sarga entitled "Gaura Causes Bewilderment to Çré
Sanätana Paëita," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

[p.140]
* * *
Fourteenth Sarga
çré-viñëu-priyä-viväha
The Marriage of Viñëu with Viñëu-priyä

tataç ca bhagavän këaù / karuëäpara-mänasaù
tayor duùkham anusmtya / präpayya nija-brähmaëam 1
tataù - then; ca - and; bhagavän - the Supreme Lord; këaù - Çré Kåñëa; karuëä merciful; apara - incomparable; mänasaù - mind; duùkham - grief; anusmtya recalling; präpayya - obtaining; nija-brähmaëam - His own brähmaëa.
The boundlessly merciful Lord Kåñëa, feeling sympathy for sorrow of the
brähmaëa couple, and engaged another brähmaëa to be His messenger.

väëyä madhurayä vipra-mukhena präkto yathä
anunéya tayoù kanyäm / udvähärtha mano dadhe 2
väëyä - by the words; madhurayä - sweet; vipra-mukhena - by the mouth of the
brähmaëa; präktaù - ordinary; yathä - as if; anunéya - soliciting; tayoù - of the
couple; kanyäm - daughter; udväha-artham - the object of marriage; manaù mind; dadhe - set.
Resolving to marry their daughter, Çré Hari conciliated them with sweet words just
like an ordinary man, through the mouth of that brähmaëa.

tataù çubhe vilagnendu-nakatra-çubha-sayute
adhiväsa-dine sädhu-vipra-saìga-samägate 3

[p.141]
tataù - then; çubhe - at the auspicious; vilagna - rising of constellations; indu moon; nakatram - stars; çubha-sayute - at the auspicious conjunction; adhiväsadine - on the day of purifying household frough väsa (fragrances); sädhu saintly persons; vipra - brähmaëas; saìga - association; samägate - at the
assembly.
Then on the new day selected for the Lord's adhiväsa, when in the sky arose an
auspicious conjunction of the stars and moon, when saintly brähmaëas assembled...

mròaìga-paëavädhmäne / veda-dhvani-ninädite
dhüpa-dépa-patäkäbhir / alaìkta-dig-antare 4
mròaìga - mdaìga; paëava - karatalas; ädhmäne - sounds; veda-dhvani-ninädite
- when the sounds of Vedic mantras; dhüpa - incense; dépa - ghee lamps;
patäkäbhiù - with flags; alaìkta - decorated; dik-antare - when all directions.
...when mdaìga and karatalas were sounded, when Vedic hymns were vibrated,
when all directions were decorated with flags and banners, when lamps and fragrant
incense were lit...

svasti-väcana pürva hi / sapüjya pit-devatäù
adhiväsa-kriyä cakre / brähmaëaiù saha sa prabhuù 5
svasti-väcanam - words of benediction; pürvam - accompanied; hi - indeed;
sapüjya - worshipped; pit - forefathers; devatäù - demigods; adhiväsa-kriyäm the activities of entering household; cakre - made; brähmaëaiù - with
brähmaëas; saha - with; saù - He; prabhuù - the Lord.
...when the controlling deities of the universe and the Lord's forefathers were
offered oblations accompanied by auspicious utterances of svasti!, then the Lord
performed the ceremonial rituals of to purify the household, as conducted by
brähmaëa priests.

[p.142]
tato dadau dvijätibhyaù / sajjanebhyaç ca candanam
gandha-tämbüla-mälya ca / bhüri bhüri-yaçä hariù 6
tataù - then; dadau - He gave; dvi-jätibhyaù - to the twice-born brähmaëas;
sajjanebhyaù - to the pure; ca - and; candanam - sandalwood; gandha - scented;
tämbüla - betel nut; mälyam - garlands; ca - and; bhüri - plentiful; bhüri-yaçä with broad fame; hariù - Çré Hari.
Çré Hari of wide-spread fame then presented profuse pulp of sandal, scented
chewing spices with päna, and garlands to those saintly twice-born men.

tasmin käle paëòitäryaù / çré-yutaù çré-sanätanaù
abhyayäc chraddhayä yuktaù / prahöenäntarätmanä 7
tasmin - at that; käle - time; paëòita-äryaù - noble scholar; çré-yutaù - with the
goddess of fortune; çré-sanätanaù - Çré Sanätana; abhyayät - arrived; çraddhayä with faith; yuktaù - engaged; prahöena - with joy; antara-ätmanä - inside himself.
Then the noble scholar Sanätana faithfully arrived accompanied by his daughter
who appeared like the goddess of fortune. He was attired opulently and his heart
immersed in jubilation.

brähmaëän vipra-sädhvéç ca / preayitvä yathä-vidhi
kärayäm äsa jämätur / adhiväsa mahätmanaù 8
brähmaëän - brähmaëas; vipra-sädhvéù - brähmaëés; ca - and; preayitvä summoned; yathä-vidhi - according to precept; kärayäm äsa - did; jämätuù - of
his son-in-law; adhiväsam - marriage rite; mahä-ätmanaù - of the magnanimous
person.
He summoned together the brähmaëas and their saintly wives and then performed
the adhiväsa of his great son-in-law according to Vedic vidhi.

[p.143]
svaya cakre sva-duhitur / adhiväsa yathä-vidhi
mahänanda-rase magne / nävindad bhava-vedanäm 9
svayam - himself; cakre - made; sva-duhituù - of his own daughter; adhiväsam household; yathä-vidhi - according to precept; mahä-änanda - the great joy; rase in the mellow; magne - merged; na - not; avindat - he experienced; bhavavedanäm - the torture of material existence.
Having performed the adhiväsa ceremony of his daughter according to Vedic
precept, he ceased to experience the tribulations of material misery, and merged in a
great ocean of bliss.

athäpara-dine prätar / bhagavän jähnavé-jalam
avagähyähnika ktvä / präyät sädhubhir anvitaù 10
nändé-mukhän pit-gaëän / sapüjya susamähitaù
sthitanta sahasäbhyetya / dvija-puträ mahaujasaù 11
vasträlaìkära-mäläbhir / gandhädyaiù samabhüayan
çrémad-viçvambhara deva / käma-koöi-sama-prabham 12
atha - then; apara-dine - on the following day; prätaù - early; bhagavän - the
Supreme Lord; jähnavé-jalam - the water of the Gaìgä; avagähya - having
bathed; ahnikam - daily; ktvä - done; präyät - went forth; sädhubhiù - with
saintly persons; anvitaù - together; nändé-mukhän - ancestors in suffering; pitgaëän - hosts of forefathers; sapüjya - having worshipped; su-samähitaù - with
great attention; sthitantam - standing; sahasä - suddenly; abhyetya - arriving;
dvija-puträ - the sons of brähmaëas; mahä - great; ojasaù - vigorous; vastra garments; alaìkära - ornaments; mäläbhi - with garlands; gandha-ädyaiù - with
scented oils and other pleasing articles; samabhüayan - fully ornamented; çrématviçvambharam - beautiful Viçvambhara; devam - Supreme Personality of
Godhead; käma - Cupids; koöi - ten million; sama-prabham - equal effulgence.

[p.144]
Early on the following day, after taking His daily bath in the waters of the Jähnavé,
Bhagavän Çré Gaura went forth, and assisted by saintly persons He attentively
worshipped His ancestors to release them from any suffering. Just then, powerful
young sons of brähmaëas suddenly arrived and completely decorated beautiful
Viçvambharadeva, whose effulgence was like millions of Cupids, with silken
garments, ornaments, garlands, scented oils and so forth.

tasmin kane cakäräçu / çré-sanätanaù paëòitaù
vasträlaìkära-mäläbhir / gandhädyair samalaìktäm 13
kanyä vaivähika käla / viditvä brähmaëottamän
preayäm äsa jämätur / ädarän ayanäya saù 14
tasmin - at that; kane - moment; cakära - he did; äçu - quickly; çré-sanätanaù Çré Sanätana; paëòitaù - the scholar; vastra - garments; alaìkära - ornaments;
mäläbhiù - with garlands; gandha-ädyaiù - with scents and so forth;
samalaìktäm - fully ornamented; kanyäm - daughter; vaivähikam kälam marriage time; viditvä - knowing; brähmaëa-uttamän - elevated brähmaëas;
preayäm äsa - he sent; jämätuù - for his son-in-law; ädarät - with respect;
ayanäya - for the coming; saù - he.
At that moment, Çré Sanätana Paëita, knowing that the auspicious time for the
wedding had arrived, also had his daughter decorated with garments, ornaments,
flower garlands, scented oils and so forth, and he sent elevated brähmaëas to
respectfully bring his son-in-law.

tato gatvä dvija-çrethäù / procuç ca vinayänvitäù
udvähärtha tava çubhaù / kälo 'ya samupasthitaù 15
tataù - then; gatvä - having gone; dvija-çrethäù - elevated brähmaëas; procuù declared; ca - and; vinaya-anvitäù - filled with humility; udväha-artham - the
purpose of marriage; tava - Your; çubhaù - auspicious; kälaù - time; ayam - this;
samupasthitaù - arrived.

[p.145]
Approaching Him, those excellent brähmaëas submissively informed Çré Hari, "The
auspicious moment for Your marriage has now arrived.

vijayasva çubhäya tva / gamanäya mati kuru
paëòitasya ghe tasya / bhägya ko vaktum arhati 16
vijayasva - conquer; çubhäya - for welfare; tvam - You; gamanäya - for going;
matim - mind; kuru - do; paëòitasya - of the scholar; ghe - in the home; tasya his; bhägyam - fortune; kaù - who?; vaktum - to speak; arhati - ought.
"Conquer fortune and fix Your mind to enter the paëòita's home. Who can
describe Your good fortune?!"

tac chrutvä brähmaëa-vaco / bhagavän sädaränanaù
jaya-ghoair brahma-ghoair / mdaìga-paöaha-svanaiù 17
véëä-paëava-käsyädi / nisvanair mudito yayau
mätara sapraëamyäçu / dolärohaëa-pürvakam 18
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; brähmaëa-vacaù - the words of the brahmaëas;
bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sa-ädara-änanaù - with a respectful face; jayaghoaiù - to cries of victory; brahma-ghoaiù - with utterances of Vedic hymns;
mdaìga-paöaha-svanaiù - with the beating of the mdaìga and paöaha drums;
véëä-paëava-käsya-ädi-nisvanaiù - with the sounds of the vénä, cymbals and
gongs, etc.; muditaù - joyously; yayau - He went; mätaram - mother; sapraëamya
- offering obeisances; äçu - swiftly; dola - palanquin; arohaëa - mounting;
pürvakam - together.
Hearing these words of the brähmaëas with a respectful face, the Lord happily
went to His mother. He offered her His prostrated obeisances. and then at once sat
down with her in a palanquin. The procession began accompanied by cries of
"Jaya!" and utterances of Vedic hymns, along with the beating of mådaìga and
paöaha drums, as well as the vibrations of the véëä, cymbals, gongs,and various
other instruments.

[p.146]
dépävalibhir anyaiç ca / nakatrair iva candramäù
çarac-candräçu-çubhräyä / çibikäyä raräja saù 19
dépa-ävalibhiù - with rows of lamps; anyaiù - with others; ca - and; nakatraiù with the stars; iva - like; candramäù - moon; çarat-candra - autumn moon; açuçubhräyäm - in the splendid rays; çibikäyäm - on the palanquin; raräja - He
shone; saù - He.
While the autumn moon shone with brilliant rays in the sky above, Lord Hari,
together with the other palanquins with their rows of lamps, also shone like a moon
amidst the stars.

suvarëa-gaura-kéräbdhau / meru-çìga iväparaù
jagan-mohana-lävaëya / vyakti-ktya svaya hariù 20
su-varëa - beautiful color; gaura-kéra-abdhau - in the golden milk ocean; meruçìgaù - the peak of mount Meru; iva - like; aparaù - another; jagat-mohana bewildering the all beings of the universe; lävaëyam - in the beauty; vyakti-ktya became manifest; svayam - personally; hariù - Lord Hari.
Appearing like another Mount Meru amidst the golden milk ocean, the original
Supreme Lord Çré Hari revealed the beauty which infatuates all living beings.

präpta jämätara vékya / harotphulla-tanüruhaù
udyamyänéya vidhinä / pädyam äsanam ädarät 21
dattvä ta varayäm äsa / vastra-srag-anulepanaiù
druta-käïcana-gauräìga / mälaté-mälya-vakasam 22
meru-çìga yathä-gaìgä / dvidhä-dhärä-samanvitam
udyat-pürëa-niçä-nätha-vadana paìkajekaëam 23

[p.147]
präptam - arrival; jämätaram - son-in-law; vékya - seeing; hara - bliss; utphulla fully erect; tanüruhaù - hairs; udyamya - raising up; änéya - leading; vidhinä - by
precept; pädyam - foot-wash; äsanam - seat; ädarät - with respect; dattvä having given; tam - Him; varayäm äsa - he covered; vastra - garments; srak garlands; anulepanaiù - anointed with sandalwood pulp; druta-käïcana - molten
gold; gauräìgam - the Golden Lord; mälaté-mälya - garlanded with mälaté
flowers (jasmine); vakasam - chest; meru-çìgam - the peak of Mount Meru;
yathä - as; gaìgä - Gaìgä; dvidhä-dhärä - two waterfalls; samanvitam - together;
udyat - rising; pürëa - full; niçä-nätha - lord of the night; vadanam - face; paìkaja - mud-born (lotus); ékaëam - eyes.
When Çré Sanätana Paëita saw that his son-in-law had arrived, his hairs stood erect
with jubilation. He took the Lord by the hand and, lifting Him from the palanquin,
ushered Him into his home. Then having respectfully bathed His feet and offered
Him a seat as enjoined by çästra, he dressed Him with new garments and fresh
flower-garlands, and anointed His brow with pulp of sandal. Gauräìga's body
glittered like molten gold, and the garland of mälaté flowers hanging upon His chest
appeared like the Gaìgä forming two waterfalls as it falls from the peak of Mount
Meru. His face shone like the rising full moon, and His eyes blossomed like lotuses.

dtvä jämätara çvaçrur / mumoda susmitänanä
sä dépair svastikair läjair / mäìgalyais tad dvija-striyaù 24
cakrur nirmaïchana prétä / jämätur hdy akovidäù
paramänanda-sampürëäù / kautühala-samanvitäù 25
dtvä - having seen; jämätaram - son-in-law; çvaçruù - the mother-in-law;
mumoda - took pleasure; su-smita-ananä - nicely smiling face; sä - she; dépaiù with lamps; svastikaiù - with bards; läjaiù - with fried grains; mäìgalyaiù - with
auspicious; tat - that; dvija-striyaù - the brähmaëa ladies; cakruù - they did;
nirmaïcanam - lustration; prétäù - with love; jämätuù - of the son-in-law; hdi - in
the heart; akovidäù - ignorant; parama-änanda - transcendental bliss; sampürëäù
- totally filled; kautühala-samanvitäù - filled with enthusiasm.

[p.148]
As Sanätana's wife, whose face was sweetly smiling, saw her son-in-law, she felt
much pleasure. Although ignorant of the heart of the son-in-law, the simple-hearted
brähmaëa ladies with great joy and eagerness offered an ärati ceremony to Him with
lamps of clarified butter. They made presentations of sweets such as läu and halava,
while bards played auspicious songs.

samänéya sutä divyä / çré-sanätana-paëòitaù
nyavedayat päda-müle / jämätuù susamähitäù 26
samänéya - leading; sutäm - daughter; divyäm - divine; çré-sanätana-paëòitaù Çré Sanätana Paëita; nyavedayat - offered; päda-müle - at His feet; jämätuù - of
his son-in-law; su-samähitäù - with great attention.
Çré Sanätana Paëita led out his divine daughter, and with much attention presented
her to the feet of his son-in-law.

tato jaya-jayair nädair / vipräëä veda-nisvanaiù
nänä-väditra-nirghoair / babhüva mahad-utsavaù 27
tataù - then; jaya-jayaiù nädai - with sounds of "jaya" (victory); vipräëäm - of
the vipras; veda-nisvanaiù - with sounds of Vedic hymns; nänä - many; väditra instruments; nirghoaiù - with sounds; babhüva - there was; mahat-utsavaù - a
great festival.
Then there was a great festival as the assembly cried, "Jaya! Jaya!" Learned
brähmaëas intoned mantras from the Vedas while many musical instruments were
sounded.

vavara pupair anyonya / viëur viëu-priyä ca sä
säkäd eva mahänando / 'vatatära svaya vibhuù 28
vavara - rained; pupaiù - with flowers; anyonyam - one another; viëuù - Lord
Viëu; viëu-priyä - the beloved of Viñëu; ca - and; sä - she; säkät - directly; eva -

[p.149]
indeed; mahä-änandaù - supreme bliss; avatatära - descended; svayam - in
person; vibhuù - the great.
Viñëu and Viñëu-priyä rained flowers upon one another, and then it appeared as if
mahänanda, the Lord's supreme bliss potency had personally descended on that
spot.

tataù sa äsane çubhre / çuddhästaraëa-sayute
upaviöo mahä-bähur / hariù sä ca çubhä vadhüù 29
tataù - then; sa - He; äsane - on His seat; çubhre - resplendent; çuddha- pure;
ästaraëa - quilted throne; sayute - joined; upaviöaù - seated; mahä-bähuù mighty-armed; hariù - the remover of sin; sä - she; ca - and; çubhä - beautiful;
vadhüù - bride.
Then mighty-armed Çré Hari and His beautiful bride sat together upon a splendid
spotless quilted throne.

dväravatyä yathä këo / rukmiëé ruciränanä
vavdhe 'thänayoù känté / rohiëé-çaçinor iva 30
dväravatyäm - in Dväravaté; yathä - as; këaù - Çré Kåñëa; rukmiëé - and Çré
Rukmiëé Devé; rucira - lovely; änanä - face; vavdhe - increased; atha - then;
anayoù - of those two; känti - luster; rohiëé-çaçinoù - of the star Rohiëé and the
moon; iva - like.
Combined together, their luster increased like Çré Kåëa in Dvärakä with lovely
Rukmiëé, or like the star Rohiëé with the moon.

ägatya vidhivat kanyäm / utsjya kara-paìkaje
dattvä ktärtham ätmäna / mene sa çré-sanätanaù 31
ägatya - having received; vidhi-vat - by the precept; kanyäm - daughter; utsjya -

[p.150]
having released; kara-paìkaje - in the lotus hand; dattvä - given; kta-artham fulfilled; ätmänam - himself; mene - thought; saù - he; çré-sanätanaù - Çré
Sanätana.
After begetting a daughter according to the principles of scripture and finally
releasing her to the lotus hands of the Lord, Çré Sanätana Paëita then considered his
life fulfilled.

tato vivähe nirvtte / ktvä sa sumahotsavam
äjagäma nija geha / sa-bhäryä jagatä guruù 32
tata - then; vivähe - the wedding; nirvtte - completed; ktvä - done; saù - He; sumahä-utsavam - a very great festival; äjagäma - entered; nijam - own; geham home; sa-bhäryä - with His wife; jagatäm - of the universes; guruù - the spiritual
master.
Then when the wedding was finished and the great festival complete, the guru of
the cosmic manifestation entered His dwelling accompanied by His wife.

dtvä tu ta kiti-surair abhinandyamäna / vadhvä sama sapadi geham
upägata sä
geha-praveçana-vidhi muditä cakära / sädhvébhir bandhura-mukhé
janané muräreù 33
dtvä - having seen; tu - and; tam - him; kiti-suraiù - by the sages of the earth;
abhinandyamä-nam - being praised; vadhvä - with His wife; samam - with; sapadi
- suddenly; geham - household life; upägatam - arrived; sä - she; geha-praveçana entering household life; vidhim - precept; muditä - joyful; cakära - did;
sädhvébhiù - with saintly ladies; bandhura-mukhé - charming face; janané mother; mura-areù - of the enemy of the demon Mura.
Seeing Gaura praised by the learned men of the earth as He abruptly again arrived
together with His wife, on the threshhold of household life, the joyous sweet-faced

[p.151]
mother of Muräri together with other saintly ladies instructed the couple on the
principles for practicing household life.

Thus ends the Fourteenth Sarga entitled "The Marriage of Viñëu with Viñëupriyä," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifteenth Sarga
çrémad-éçvara-puré-darçanam
The Meeting of Çré Gaura Hari with Çrémad I~çvara Puré

tataù purasthair abhinandito harir / vasan ghe brähmaëa-vaidyasajjanän
apäöhayal laukika-sat-kriyä-vidhi / cakära käruëya-vidhänam
adbhutam 1
tata - then; pura-sthaiù - by the residents of the town; abhinanditaù congratulated; hariù - Lord Hari; vasan - dwelling; ghe - in the home; brähmaëavaidya-sajjanän - brähmaëas, physicians and other respectable men; apäöhayat He taught; laukika - for ordinary people; sat-kriyä - pure action; vidhim standard; cakära - did; käruëya - compassion; vidhänam - expedient; adbhutam wonderful.
Thereafter, having been congratulated by the residents of Navadvépa, Çré Hari
dwelt at home. He thereby compassionately accepted a wonderful and fitting means
to give instruction to the brähmaëa community, the physicians and other
respectable people, on the standard of pure life for humanity.

väcaspater väg-mitayä jahära / kävyasya kävyena vidhoù çriya saù

[p.152]
käntyä svaya bhümi-gate sureçe / nyastä punas tä hdaye daduù kim
2
väcaspateù - of Båhaspati; väk-mitayä - by His exactitude of speech; jahära - He
took away; kävyasya - of the poet Çukra; kävyena - by His poetry; vidhoù - of the
moon; çriyam - splendor; saù - He; käntyä - by His loveliness; svayam - in
person; bhümi-gate - come to earth; sura-éçe - the Lord of the gods; nyastäm given up; punaù - again; täm - her; hdaye - in the heart; daduù - they gave; kim what?.
When that Lord of the suras thus descended to earth, by the Lord's exquisitely
articulated speech He deprived Båhaspati, the celestial master of eloquence, of his
glory. By His poetry, He dwarfed Çukra, the master of poets, and by His luster He
deprived the moon of its splendor. But furthermore, what did such persons
genuinely give from the heart (as did Gauräìga)?

so 'dhyäpayad vipra-mahattamäs tän / ye pürva-janmärjita-puëyaräçayaù
brümaù katha bhägyavatä mahad-guëa / yeä svaya loka-gurur
gurur bhavet 3
saù - He; adhyäpayat - taught; vipra - scholars; mahattamän - greatest; tän those; ye - who; pürva-janma - previous birth; arjita - earned; puëya-raçayaù heaps of pious deeds; brümaù - we proclaim; katham - how?; bhägyavatäm - of
the fortunate souls; mahat-guëam - great qualities; yeäm - of those; svayam - in
person; loka-guruù - guru of all the worlds; guruù - spiritual master; bhavet - He
can be.
Those whom He taught were the greatest among learned scholars, who in previous
births had earned the position of becoming His student by accumula-ting heaps of
pious deeds. We must proclaim of those fortunate persons, "Oh! What great
qualities they had that the guru of all the worlds could personally become their
guru!"

[p.153]
saundarya-mädhurya-viläsa-vibhramai / raräja räjad-vara-hemagauraù
viëu-priyä-lälita-päda-paìkajo / rasena pürëo rasikendra-mauliù 4
saundarya - beauty; mädhurya - sweetness; viläsa - pastimes; vibhramaiù - with
bewilderments; raräja - shone; räjat - radiant; vara - beautiful; hema-gauraù golden Lord Gaura; viëu-priyä - by Çrématé Viñëu-priyä; lälita - were caressed;
päda-paìkajaù - His lotus feet; rasena - with mellow; pürëaù - full; rasika-indraù best of relishers of mellows; mauliù - the crest-jewel.
The radiant and lovely Golden Lord, whose lotus feet were gently massaged by
Viñëu-priyä Devé, shone with bewildering pastimes of beauty and sweetness. He is
the complete embodiment of all rasa, and therefore is the crest-jewel of all rasikas.

vidyä-viläsena vilola-bähur / gacchan pathi çiya-samäkulo hariù
ägatya gehe nija-mätur antike / tasyäù sukha nityam adhät priyäsamam 5
vidyä-viläsena - by His pastimes of scholarship; vilola-bähuù - He with
swinging arms; gacchan - going; pathi - on the path; çiya-samäkulaù - a crowd of
students; hariù - the dispeller of evil; ägatya - having arrived; gehe - in His
home; nija-mätuù - of His mother; antike - near; tasyäù - of her; sukham happiness; nityam - always; adhät - He bestowed; priyä-samam - just as he did
His wife.
During His pastimes of scholarship, He would walk on the path swinging His arms,
surrounded by a crowd of His students. Arriving back in His home in the His
mother's presence, He always was concerned equally for her and Viñëu-priyä's
happiness.

tataù sa lokänuçikayan manas / cakära kartu pit-käryam acyutaù
çräddha sa ktvä vidhivat vidhäna-vid / gayä pratasthe kiti-devatänvitaù 6

[p.154]
tataù - then; saù - He; loka-anu-çikayan - taught the people, following the
ways of previous exemplars; manaù cakära - set His mind; kartum - to do; pitkäryam - the duty to His father; acyutaù - the infallible Lord; çräddham ceremony for His departed father; saù - He; ktvä - having done; vidhivat according to vidhi (scriptural precept); vidhäna-vit - wise in precept; gayäm the city of Gayä; pratasthe - He set forth; kiti-devatä - earth-gods (brähmaëas);
anvitaù - accompanied.
To teach mankind, the infallible Lord, who is naturally well-versed in vidhi,
determined fulfill His last duty to His father, following the previous authorities.
Having performed His father's çräddha ceremony according to such vidhi, He set
forth for Gayä accompanied by brähmaëas.

gacchan pathi präkta-ceöayä hasan / narmoktibhiù kautukam
ävahan satäm
reme kuraìgävali-räjitäsu / sthaléu paçyan mga-kautukäni 7
gacchan - going; pathi - on the path; präkta-ceöayä - with material behavior;
hasan - laughing; narma-uktibhiù - with pleasurable speech; kautukam happiness; ävahan - bringing; satäm - of the saintly men; reme - He took
pleasure; kuraìga - deer; ävali - series; räjitäsu - in the resplendent; sthaléu tablelands; paçyan - seeing; mga-kautukäni - curious animals.
Travelling on the forest path, He brought happiness to the hearts of those men as
He laughed and spoke with jolly words in the manner of ordinary folk. While
observing the various curious animals in the tablelands, He delighted in the many
groups of deer.

snätvä sa corändhayake hrade mudä / ktvähnika deva-pitn yathävidhi
santarpayitvä sahasänvitaù priyair / mandäram äruhya dadarça
devatäù 8

[p.155]
snätvä - having bathed; saù - He; cora-andhayake hrade - the lake named
Corändhaka (lake of the blind thief); mudä - with joy; ktvä ahnikam - having
performed His daily duties; deva-pitn - universal controllers and forefathers;
yathä-vidhi - according to precept; santarpayitvä - having propitiated; sahasaanvitaù - suddenly; priyaiù - with His dear associates; mandäram - Mount
Mandara; äruhya - climbing up; dadarça - He saw; devatäù - the gods.
Once He bathed joyfully in the lake named Corändhaka, He offered oblations to
satisfy the devatäs and His forefathers in accordance with the injunctions of çästra.
Suddenly after performing His daily duties, He climbed a mountain together with
His dear friends and saw the devatäs.

tato 'vatéryävajagäma satvara / dharädharädho bhavana dvijasya
saù
manuya-çikäm anudarçayan prabhur / jvareëa santapta-tanur
babhüva 9
tataù - then; avatérya - descending; avajagäma - He came down; sa-tvaram with speed; dhara-ädharä - holder of mountains (the earth); adhaù - down;
bhavanam - home; dvijasya - of a brähmaëa; saù - He; manuya-çikäm - a lesson
to humanity; anudarçayan - showing; prabhuù - Lord; jvareëa - with a fever;
santapta - inflamed; tanuù - body; babhüva - He became.
Then He descended with great swiftness to the earth, and stayed in a brähmaëa's
home. There He taught a lesson to humanity from the scriptures. He was stricken
with a fever, and His body became very hot.

babhüva me vartmani daiva-yogäc / charéra-vaivaçyam ataù katha
syät
gayäsu me paitka-karma vighnaù / çreyasy abhüd ity aticintayäkulaù 10
babhüva - it was; me - my; vartmani - on the path; daiva-yogät - by the

[p.156]
arrangement of Providence; çaréra - body; vaivaçyam - want of control; ataù therefore; katham - how?; syät - it may be; gayäsu - at Gayä; me - My; paitkakarma - duty to My father; vighnaù - obstacle; çreyasi - in ultimate welfare; abhüt
- it was; iti - thus; ati-cintayä - with deep thoughts; äkulaù - agitated.
Lord Gaura became disturbed by these profound thoughts,"While traveling by
Divine arrangement, My body is out of control. If it continues in this way, how can
My duty to My father in Gayä be accomplished? This is an impediment for his
ultimate welfare."

tato 'py upäya paricintayan svaya / jvarasya çäntyai dvija-pädasevanam
vara sa vijïäya tathopapädayan / tad-ambu-päna bhagaväç cakära
11
tataù - then; api - however; upäyam - a means; paricintayan - fully considering;
svayam - of its own accord; jvarasya - of the fever; çäntyai - for the alleviation;
dvija-päda-sevanam - service to the feet of the brähmaëas; varam - boon; saù He; vijïäya - having begged; tathä - and; upapädayan - obtaining; tat - from the
brähmaëas's feet; ambu-pänam - drinking the water; bhagavän - the all-opulent
Lord; cakära - He did.
Then after exhausively pondering the matter, the means to relieve the fever
occured to Him. He should take service from the feet of the brähmaëas! Having
begged and obtained that boon from the brähmaëas, Bhagavän Gaura drank their
footwash.

ye sarva-viprä madhu-südanäçrayäù / nirantara këapadäbhicintakäù
tataù svaya këa-janäbhimäné / teä para päda-jala papau prabhuù 12
ye - who; sarva-vipräù - all advanced brähmaëas; madhu-südana-äçrayäù - take
shelter of Lord Kåñëa, the slayer of the Madhu demon; nirantaram - ceaselessly;

[p.157]
këa-pada-abhicintakäù - meditate intensely on Çré Kåñëa's feet; tataù - for that
reason; svayam - Himself; këa-janä - the people of Çré Krëa; abhimäné cherisher; teäm - of them; param - supreme; päda-jalam - foot-wash; papau - He
drank; prabhuù - the Lord.
All realized brähmaëas accept Çré Madhusüdana as their exclusive shelter.
Therefore incessantly they contemplate His feet. For this reason, Çré Kåñëa Himself
drank their supremely potent footwash, desiring to thereby glorify His devotees.

tato jvarasyopaçamo babhüva / tän darçayitvä dvija-päda-bhaktim
jagäma tértha sa punaù punäkhya / cakära tatra dvija-devatärcanam
13
tataù - thereafter; jvarasya - of the fever; upaçamaù - calming; babhüva - it was;
tän - them; darçayitvä - having shown; dvija-päda - the feet of the twice-born;
bhaktim - devotion; jagäma - He went; tértham - the holy bathing place; saù - He;
punaù punä äkhya - known as Punaù Punä; cakära - He did; tatra - there; dvijadevatä-arcanam - worship of the twice-born and the demigods.
Thus the Lord's fever was cured. Having thus demonstrated the power of devotion
to the feet of the twice-born, He departed for the sacred river Punaù Punä. There He
offered worship to the twice-born and the devatäs.

tataù samuttérya nadé sa gacchan / térthottame räja-ghe su-puëye
brahmäkhya-kuëòe pit-deva-püjä / cakära lokän anuçikayan saù 14
tataù - then; samuttérya - having crossed; nadém - the river; saù - He; gacchan travelling; tértha-uttame - at the best of holy places; räja-ghe - near the chief city
of Bihar called Räja-gha; su-puëye - very sanctified; brahma-äkhya-kuëòe - at the
pond named Brahma; pit-deva-püjä - worship of forefathers and the demigods;
cakära - performed; lokän - people; anuçikayan - teaching to follow; saù - He.

[p.158]
After crossing that river, He travelled to the great and holy tértha named Brahmakuëòa, near the chief city of Bihar named Räja-gha. There He performed worship of
His fore-fathers and the devatäs, in order to encourage people to follow Vedic
injunctions.

...patyä sva-mätuù sa-suro 'gamac chanair / gayä gadä-bhc-caraëa
didrkuù 15
...patyä - on account of His father; sva-mätuù - of His mother; sa-suraù - with
the godly men; agamat - came; çanaiù - gradually; gayäm - to Gayä; gadä-bht the Lord who bears a club; caraëam - foot-print; didrkuù - being desious to see.
...Thus for the sake of His father, the Lord with the company of brähmaëas
gradually arrived at Gayä. Çré Gauräìga was eager to behold the footprint of Lord
Viñëu, the wielder of the club.
[Note: Two lines from verse fifteen have been lost in the original manuscript.]

tasmin çubha nyäsi-vara dadarça / sa éçvaräkhya hari-pädabhaktam
puré pareçaù parayätma-bhaktyä / tuöa nanämainam athäbravéc ca
16
tasmin - at that place; çubham - auspicious; nyäsi-varam - an exalted
renunciant; dadarça - He saw; saù - He; éçvara-äkhyam - known as I~çvara; haripäda-bhaktam - a devotee of the feet of Lord Hari; purém - titled Puré; para-éçaù the Lord of the transcendental realm; parayä - with intense; ätma - of the soul;
bhaktyä - with devotion; tutam - pleased; nanäma - He bowed; enam - to him;
atha - then; abravét - said; ca - and.
There He saw an exalted and virtuous renunciant of the name I~çvara Puré, who
was devoted to the feet of Çré Hari. Çré Çacénandana, master of the transcendental
realm, prostrated Himself with rapt devotion before that great soul, who became
pleased with Him. The Lord then addressed him as follows:

[p.159]
diöyädya dta bhagavan padämbuja / tava prabho brühi yathä
bhavämbudhim
nistérya këäìghri-saroruhämtam / päsyämi tan me karuëä-nidhe
svayam 17
diöyä - by good fortune; adya - today; döam - seen; bhagavan - O blessed Lord;
pada-ambujam - lotus feet; tava - your; prabho - O master; brühi - please tell;
yathä - that; bhava-ambudhim - ocean of repeated birth and death; nistérya traversing; këa-aìghri - Çré Kåñëa's feet; sara-ruha - lake-grown (lotus); amtam deathless; päsyämi - I shall see; tat - that; me - to me; karuëä-nidhe - O ocean of
mercy; svayam - by your own desire.
"He Bhagavan! By the blessings of Providence, I have seen your lotus feet today ! O
my master! Ocean of mercy! Mercifully tell me, if your heart approves, how I may
traverse this ocean of sasära and drink the immortal ambrosia of Kåñëa's lotus feet."

sa ittham äkarëya harer vaco 'mta / mudä dadau mantra-vara matijïaù
daçäkara präpya sa gaura-candramä / tuöäva ta bhakti-vibhävitaù
svayam 18
aù - he; ittham - thus; äkarëya - hearing; vacaù - words; hareù - of Lord Hari;
amtam - nectar; mudä - with joy; dadau - he gave; mantra-varam - the excellent
mantra; mati-jïaù - who knew the mind; daça-akaram - of ten syllables; präpya obtaining; saù - He; gaura-candramä - Gaura Candra; tuöäva - satisfied; tam - him;
bhakti-vibhävitaù - by His arousal of pure devotion; svayam - spontaneous.
Hearing the nectarean words of Gaura Hari, I~çvara Puré could understand His
pure mentality, and gladly he awarded Him a sublime mantra of ten syllables.
Experiencing a spontaneous awakening of pure devotion, Çré Gaura Candra offered
some words of praise to His gurudeva.

nyäsin dayälo tava päda-saìgamät / ktärthatä me 'dya babhüva

[p.160]
durlabhä
çré-këapädäbja-madhünmadä ca sä / yathä tariyämi duranta-sastim
19
nyäsin - O renunciant; dayälo - O merciful personality; tava - your; pädasaìgamät - by the association of Your feet; ktärtha-tä - fulfillment; me - My; adya
- today; babhüva - there was; durlabhä - rare; çré-këa-päda-abja - the lotus feet of
Çré Kåñëa; madhu-unmadä - intoxicating honey; ca - and; sä - that; yathä - so
that; tariyämi - I shall transcend; du-anta - difficult to end; sastim - cycle of birth
and death.
The son of Çacé said, "O merciful renunciant, today by the touch of your feet I have
achieved an extremely rare gift, by which every desire of Mine is now fulfilled. That
gift is the intoxicating honey of Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet. By tasting that honey I shall
surmount the otherwise insurmountable ocean of birth and death."

Thus ends the Fifteenth Sarga entitled "The Meeting of Çré Gaura Hari with
Çrémad I~çvara Puré," in the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Sixteenth Sarga
gayägamanam
Çré Gaura Returns Home from Gayä

sa bhakti paridarçayan svaya / phalguu cakre pit-devatärcanam
pretädi-çìge pit-piëòa-däna / brahmäìgulé-reëu-yuteu ktvä 1
gurau - to the guru; saù - He; bhaktim - devotion; paridarçayan - displaying;

[p.161]
svayam - spontaneous; phalguu - in lands around the river Phalgu; cakre - He
did; pit-devatä-arcanam - worship of His forefathers and the demigods; preta deceased; ädi-çìge - on the mountain peak named _di-Çåìga; pit-piëòa-dänam made offering of Viñëu-prasäda to His father; brahma - the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; aìgulé - with folded hands; reëu-yuteu - holding the dust of his
father; ktvä - having done.
Thus Çré Gauräìga spontaneously showed the world the correct process of
devotional service unto Çré Guru. Then with folded hands, He performed worship of
his forefathers and the devatäs in the waters of the Phalgu river, and contemplating
the Supreme Lord, He placed the dust of His father's remains in the waters of that
river. He then offered piëa in the form of Viñëu-prasäda to His father on the
mountain named _di-Çåìga.

devän samabhyarcya dadau dvijätaye / pitn samuddiçya yatheöadakiëäm
tato 'varuhyäçu yayäv udécé / pit-kriyä dakiëa-mänase ca 2
devän - the demigods; samabhyarcya - having fully worshipped; dadau - He
gave; dvi-jätaye - to the twice-born; pitn - His forefathers; samuddiçya - for the
sake of; yathä - as; iöa-dakiëäm - desired remuneration; tataù - then; avaruhya descending; äçu - swiftly; yayau - He went; udécém - north; pit-kriyä - duty to His
father; dakiëa-mänase - at the city named Dakiëa-mänasa; ca - and.
After properly worshipping the universal controllers, for the sake of His ancestors
He gave in charity to the brähmaëas as much as they desired. Then at once He
descended and travelled northwards to the city named Dakñina-mänasa, where He
performed another ceremony for the welfare of His ancestors.

ktvottare mänasa-saìjïake ca / yayau sa jihvä-capale dvijänvitaù
çräddha pitnäm atha devatänäm / ktvä gayä-mürdhni jagäma htaù 3
ktvä - having performed; uttare - northern; mänasa-saìjïake - known as
Mänasa; ca - and; yayau - He went; saù - He; jihvä-capale - at the bathing place

[p.162]
named Jihvä-capala; dvija-anvitaù - with brähmaëas; çräddham - the çräddha
ceremony; pitnäm - of His forefathers; atha - then; devatänäm - of the gods; ktvä performed; gayä-mürdhni - the northern part of Gayä; jagäma - He went; htaù joyous.
Having also performed a çräddha ceremony in the northern part of -Dakñinamänasa, He then went to the tértha named Jihvä-capala and, together with the
brähmaëas, performed a çräddha ceremony for His forefathers and also worshipped
the devatäs. Then in a jubilant mood, He returned to the northern part of the city of
Gayä.

dvijottamaiù çoòaça-vedikäyä / cakära piëòa pit-karma-pürvakam
çrémaj-jagannätha-purandaräkhyaù / pratyakébhüya jaghe
mudänvitaù 4
dvija-uttamaiù - with elevated brähmaëas; çoòaça-vedikäyäm - on sixteen
altars; cakära - He performed; piëòam - offering of Viñëu-prasäda to His
ancestors; pit-karma - rites for His ancestors; pürvakam - together; çrématjagannätha-purandara-äkhyaù - known as Çrémat Jagannätha Purandara;
pratyaké-bhüya - became manifest; jaghe - accepted; mudä-anvitaù - with joy.
With the help of elevated brähmaëas, Lord Gauräìga then performed an offering of
piëa to His father on sixteen altars together with rites to release His father from all
distress. Then that personality who had been known as Çré Jagannätha Purandara
became distinctly visible to them and joyfully accepted the offering.

yathä çré-rämeëa hi datta-piëòaù / ghéta ägamya tadéya piträ
eva hi sarvatra hareç caritra / tathäpi dupräpyatama yad etat 5
yathä - as; çré-rämeëa - by Lord Räma; hi - indeed; datta-piëòaù - piëa was
offered; ghéta - taken; ägamya - having come; tadéya - his; piträ - by His father;
evam - thus; hi - surely; sarvatra - in every way; hareù - of Lord Hari; caritram the behavior; tathäpi - just so; dupräpyatamam - very rarely obtainable; yat which; etat - this.

[p.163]
Just as Lord Räma Candra offered piëa in ancient times and His father, Mahäräja
Daçaratha came and accepted it, so in every way Gaura Hari's behavior was the
similar. Still Gauräìga's pastimes are the most unique of all.

sa viëu-padyä hari-päda-cihna / döväti-hto manasäbravéc ca
katha hareù päda-payoja-lakma-premodayä me na babhüva dövä 6
saù - He; viëu-padyäm - made by the foot of Lord Viñëu; hari-päda-cihnam the characteristic mark; dövä - having seen; ati-htaù - very jubilant; manasä - in
His mind; abravét - said; ca - and; katham - how?; hareù - of Çré Hari; pädapayoja-lakma - signs of His lotus foot; prema-udayä - by the rising of love of
God; me - my; na - not; babhüva - it became; dövä - having seen.
When He saw the footprint of Viñëu adorned with the characteristic signs of Çré
Viñëu's feet, Gaura Hari became very jubilant but He wondered, "How can it be that
My eyes have seen the marks on Hari's lotus foot, yet prema has not arisen in My
heart?"

tasmin kane tasya babhüva daivät / suçéta-toyair abhiecana muhuù
kamporddhva-romä bhagavän babhüva / premämbu-dhärä-çatadhauta-vakäù 7
tasmin - at that; kane - moment; tasya - from Him; babhüva - there was; daivät by the will of the Lord; su-çéta-toyaiù - with very cool waters; abhiecanam shower; muhuù - repeatedly; kampa - trembling; ürddhva-romäù - hairs standing
erect - bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; babhüva - there was; prema-ambu - water
of love; dhärä - tears; çata - hundreds; dhauta - cleansed; vakäù - chest.
At that moment by Divine arrangement a continuous shower of very cool water fell
the illustrious Lord's eyes bathing the footprint of Çré Viñëu. His body trembled, His
hairs stood erect out of happiness, and His chest was bathed by hundreds of streams
of prema-tears.

[p.164]
sa vihvalaù këa-padäbja-yugma- / premotsavenäçu vimukta-saìgaù
tyaktvä gayä gantum iyea ramyäm / madhor vana sädhu-nievitä täm
8
saù - He; vihvalaù - overwhelmed; këa-pada-abja - Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet; yugma
- pair; prema - Kåñëa-love; utsavena - out of gladness; äçu - swiftly; vimuktasaìgaù - free from attachment; tyaktvä - giving up; gayäm - Gayä; gantum - to
go; iyea - He desired; ramyäm - charming; madho vanam - the forest of Madhu;
sädhu-nievitäm - frequented by the holy men; täm - that.
Because of His ecstatic love for Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet, at once He became oblivious
to externals. He wished to leave the charming city of Gayä, frequented by holy men
behind Him and depart for Madhuvana, the eternal abode of Çré Kåñëa.

prähäçarérä nava-megha-nisvanä / väëé tam ähüya cala svamandiram
tataù para käla-vaçena deva / madhor vana cänyad api sva-ceöayä 9
präha - spoke; açarérä - without a body; nava-megha-nisvanä - with a sound
like a new monsoon cloud; väëé - words; tam - Him; ähüya - summoning; cala go; sva-mandiram - to Your own home; tataù - then; param - afterwards; kälavaçena - by the influence of Time; deva - O Lord; madhoù vanam - forest of
Madhu; ca - and; anyat - other; api - also; sva-ceöayä - by Your characteristic
behavior.
Then a celestial being, without manifest form, spoke a message from the sky,
resounding like the echo of monsoon clouds newly arrived in the sky: "Dear Lord,
please return to Your home. Later, You shall certainly go to Madhuvana, and there
You shall perform all other pastimes in accordance with Your unique character.

bhavän hi sarveçvara ea niçcitaù / kartu hy akartu ca samarthaù
sarvataù
tathäpi bhtyair gadita ca yat prabho / kartu pramäëa hi tam arhasi

[p.165]
dhruvam 10
bhavän - Your honor; hi - certainly; sarva-éçvara - the Lord over all; eaù - this;
niçcitaù - certain; kartum - to do; hi - indeed; akartum - to not do; ca - and;
samarthaù - able; sarvataù - in all respects; tathä api - still; bhtyaiù - by the
servants; gaditam - said; ca - and; yat - which; prabho - O Master; kartum - to do;
pramäëam - evidence; hi - surely; tam - him; arhasi - may You kindly; dhruvam factual.
"Being the Supreme Lord, You are able in all respects to do or not do according to
Your own desire. Still, O Master, please consider these words of Your servant."

sa ittham äkarëya gira su-divyäm / ägatya geha nija-bandhubhir
vtaù
nanäma mätuç caraëe nipatya / babhüva haräçru-vilocanä çacé 11
saù - He; ittham - thus; äkarëya - hearing; giram - the words; su-divyäm supernatural; ägatya - going; geham - home; nija-bandhubhiù - with His own
kinsmen; vtaù - surrounded; nanäma - He bowed down; mätuù - of His mother;
caraëe - to the feet; nipatya - falling down; babhüva - she was; hara - gladness;
açru - tears; vilocanä - eyes; çacé - Çacé Devé.
Having heard those supernatural words, Çré Hari returned to His home, where His
kinsfolk at once surrounded Him. He fell and bowed at the feet of His mother, and
Çacé Mätä's eyes became filled with tears of joy.

ghe vasan prema-vibhinna-dhairya / rudaty ala rauti muhur muhuù
svanaiù
sa vepathur gadgadayä girä lapaty / ala hare këa hare mudä kvacit
12
ghe - in His home; vasan - dwelling; prema - love; vibhinna - shaken; dhairyam gravity; rudati - He cries; alam - He wept; rauti - He thundered; muhu muhuù -

[p.166]
repeatedly; svanaiù - with sounds; sa-vepathuù - with trembling; gadgadayä with choked voice; girä - with words; lapati alam - He murmured; mudä joyously; kvacit - sometimes.
While dwelling in His home, His gravity was sometimes broken by His sentiments
of love for Çré Kåñëa. At times He would weep, at other times He would repeatedly
make thundering sounds. At times His body trembled and at other times He would
joyously utter with faltering voice, "Hare Kåñëa, Hare..."

çréväsädi-vipra-gaëaiù kvacin nava / gayaty ala ntyati bhävapürëaù
nänävatäränukti vitanvan / reme n-lokän anuçikayaç ca 13
çréväsa-ädi-vipra-gaëaiù - with the group of learned brähmaëas headed by
Çréväsa Paëita; kvacit - sometimes; navam - novel; gayati alam - He sang; ntyati danced; bhäva-pürëaù - full of ecstasy; nänä - many; avatära - descent of the
Lord; anuktim - imitation; vitanvan - exhibit; reme - He enjoyed; n-lokän human society; anuçikayan - teaching; ca - and.
Sometimes accompanied by Çréväsa and other spiritually enlivened persons, He
sang and danced in novel ways, always filled with ecstasy. He delighted in teaching
human society by displaying as if in imitation, the pastimes of many other avatäras
of the Lord.

nyäsa ca cakre hari-päda-padme / sarvä kriyä nyäsi-varo babhüva
tato 'gamat ketra-vare mahätmabhir / vto mukunda-pramukhair
hari-priyaiù 14
nyäsam - the renounced order; ca - and; cakre - took; hari-päda-padme - at the
lotus feet of Çré Hari; sarväm - all; kriyäm - activities; nyäsi-varaù - best of
renunciants; babhüva - was; tataù - then; agamat - He went; ketra-vare - to the
best of lands, Jagannätha Puré; mahä-ätmabhiù - with great souls; vtaù surrounded; mukunda-pramukhaiù - headed by Mukunda; hari-priyaiù - by

[p.167]
those dear to Çré Hari.
Gauräìga renounced all worldly activities for the lotus feet of Çré Hari. Thus He
became the topmost of all sannyäsés. Then surrounded by great souls headed by
Mukunda all of whom felt love for Çré Hari, He went to Çré Kñetra.

dadarça deva puruottameçvara / cira ciränanda-sukhäti-sat-sukham
labdhvägamad räghava-deva-nirmita / setu pathi präjïa-janaiù sa
sädhubhiù 15
dadarça - He saw; purua - person; uttama - above the darkness; éçvaram - the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; ciram - for a long time; cira-änanda-sukha prolonged ecstatic happiness; ati-sat-sukham - transcendental pure joy; labdhvä got; agamat - went; räghava-deva-nirmitam - made by the Lord of the Raghus,
Çré Räma; setum - bridge; pathi - on the way; präjïa-janaiù - with sages; saù - He;
sädhubhiù - with saints.
There for a long time, aloof from the ignorance of the material world, He gazed
upon that Ultimate Person, Lord Jagannätha. After He had repeatedly relished pure
bliss in unlimited ecstasy for a long time, accompanied by saintly devotees He
departed on the path for Setu-bandha, the bridge built by the Lord of the Raghu
dynasty.

tatra sthitän sapta tamäla-vkän / äliìgya cakre muhur eva rodanam
tataù samägatya dadarça kürme / sa kürma-rüpa jagad-éçvara
prabhuù 16
tatra - there; sthitän - standing; sapta - seven; tamäla-vkän - tamäla trees;
äliìgya - having embraced; cakre - did; muhuù - repeatedly; eva - indeed;
rodanam - crying; tataù - then; samägatya - having come; dadarça - He saw;
kürme - at Kürma Kñetra; saù - He; kürma-rüpam - the form of Lord Tortoise;
jagat-éçvaram - the Lord of the universe; prabhuù - the master.
There after embracing seven tamäla trees, He wept much. Then Prabhu went to the

[p.168]
holy place known as Kürma Kñetra and saw the Lord of the universe in His
transcendental form of a tortoise.

taträgamac chré-puruottamäkhye / ketre jagannätha-mukha dadarça
kiyad dina tatra niväsam acyuto / vidhäya yäto mathurä madhudviaù 17
tatra - there; ägamat - He came; çré-puruottama-äkhye - named Çré
Puruñottama; ketre - field of activities; jagannätha-mukham - the face of Lord
Jagannätha; dadarça - He saw; kiyat - how many? (rhetorical); dinam - days;
tatra - there; niväsam - residence; acyutaù - the infallible; vidhäya - having
prepared; yätaù - going; mathuräm - to Mathurä; madhu-dviaù - of the enemy of
Madhu.
He then returned to Jagannätha Puré, which is known as Puruñottama Kñetra or the
field of activities for the Supreme Male. For many days Acyuta resided there. Then
having prepared Himself, the enemy of Madhu departed for Mathurä.

pädäbja-cihnaiù samalaìktä sthalé / ruroda sapräpya luöhan kitau
bhçam
kiyad dina tatra sthito jagad-guruù / premämtäsvädana-mätra
utsukaù 18
päda-abja-cihnaiù - by the marks of His lotus feet; samalaìktäm - ornamented;
sthalém - spot; ruroda - He wept; sampräpya - having obtained; luöhan - rolling;
kitau - on the earth; bhçam - very much, without hesitation; kiyat - how many?;
dinam - days; tatra - there; sthitaù - staying; jagat-guruù - spiritual master of the
universe; prema-amta - nectar of love of God; äsvädana - relishing; mätra - only;
utsukaù - eager.
Upon reaching that spot ornamented by the marks of Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet, the
jagad-guru wept profusely, and without hesitation rolled upon the earth in
exultation. How many days did Mahäprabhu stay there solely eager to relish Kåñëa-

[p.169]
prema-rasa?

iti sa madhu-puré prabhur vitanvan / parama-sukha sahasä jagäma
harät
punar anupadam eva sädhu-saìgät / parama-pada puruottamapradévyam 19
iti - thus; saù - He; madhu-purém - the abode of honey; prabhuù - the master;
vitanvan - display; parama-sukham - transcendental happiness; sahasä suddenly; jagäma - He went; harät - out of joy; punaù - again; anupadam - step
by step; eva - surely; sädhu-saìgät - because of association with devotees;
parama-padam - highest abode; puruottama-pradévyam - pleasure sports of Lord
Jagannätha.
Thus did Prabhu joyously display transcendental happiness throughout the land of
Madhu-puré, which is filled with the honey of Çré Kåñëa's pastimes. Then suddenly
He left, and returned step by step to the supreme abode of Çré Puruñottama's
pleasure sports, just to reciprocate loving relationships with His devotees.

çrutvä sa térthasya vidhi-kriyä harer / labhet gayä-tértha-phala
mahattamam
devävasäne vimalä gati naraù / çraddhänvito gacchati pürëa-lälasaù
20
çrutvä - hearing; saù - He; térthasya - of the holy bathing place; vidhi-kriyäm the practices prescribed in the çästras; hareù - of Çré Hari; labhet - can obtain;
gayä-tértha-phalam - the benefit of serving Gayä, the holy place; mahattamam best; deva-avasäne - in the Lord's abode; vimaläm - free of inebriety; gatim destination; naraù - the man; çraddhä-anvitaù - with faith; gacchati - goes; pürëalälasaù - ardent longing.
A man who hears with full faith and ardent longing of Çré Hari's practice of
scriptural injunctions concerning holy places can achieve whatever excellent benefit

[p.170]
is conferred by service to Gayä, and then he travels on to the abode of the Lord, the
pure destination.

Thus ends the Sixteenth Sarga entitled "Gaura Returns Home from Gayä," in
the First Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
SECOND PRAKRAMA

* * *
First Sarga
bhäva-prakäça
Gauräìga Reveals His Ecstatic Moods

tataù proväca tac chrutvä / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù
navadvépe kim akarol / lélä lélä-nidhiù prabhu 1
tataù - then; proväca - said; tat - that; çrutvä - heard; çré-dämodara-paëòitaù the transcendental scholar; nava-dvépe - in the town of nine islands; kim what?; akarot - did; léläm - pastimes; lélä-nidhiù - jewel-ocean of pastimes;
prabhu - Master.
After Dämodara Paëita had heard from Muräri Gupta of Çré Gaura Hari's return
from Gayä, he inquired from him, "Dear sir, what further pleasure-pastimes did our
Master, who resembles a jewel-filled ocean of divine pastimes, perform while
residing in Navadvépa?

[p.171]
vistäreëa vadasvädya / sarvva-çruti-rasäyanam
tato 'sau vaktum ärebhe / murärir harñayan dvijam 2
vistareëa - in detail; vadasva - please speak; adya - today; sarva-çruti-rasaäyanam - the abode of all mellows for the ear; tataù - then; asau - he; vaktum - to
speak; ärebhe - began; muräri - Muräri Gupta; harñayan - causing pleasure;
dvijam - the brähmaëa.
"Speak to me in great depth about Him, who is the elixirean abode of all rasa for
my ears." So Muräri began to speak further, thereby greatly enlivening that
brähmaëa:

çrüyatä mahad äçcaryyä / kathä saìkñepato mama
natvä vakñyämi deveça-caitanya-caraëämbujam 3
çrüyatäm - please hear; mahat - great; äçcaryäm - wonder; kathäm - tale;
saìkñepata - in brief; mama - my; natvä - having offered obeisances; vakñyämi - I
shall speak; deva-éça - Lord of divine beings; caitanya-caraëa-ambujam - the
lotus feet of Çré Caitanya.
"O hear this great tale of wonder as I narrate it in brief. After bowing low to the
lotus feet of Çré Caitanya, Master of the gods, I shall first speak of those feet."

caitanya-candra tava päda-nakhendu-käntir / ekädaçendriya-gaëai
saha-jéva-koñam
antar-bahiç ca paripüraya tasya nitya / puñëätu nandayatu me
çaraëägatasya 4
caitanya-candra - O moon of Çré Caitanya; tava - Your; päda-nakha - toenails;
indu - moons; känti - the illumination; eka-daça - eleven; indriya-gaëai - with the
group of senses; saha - with; jéva-koñam - the encasement of the soul; anta within; bahi - without; ca - and; paripüraya - let it fill; tasya - of Him; nityam always; puñëätu - may He nurture; nandayatu - may He give pleasure; me - to

[p.172]
me; çaraëa-ägatasya - who have taken shelter.
O Caitanya Candra, may the radiance from the moonlike nails of Your lotus feet
completely pervade from within and without the body and eleven senses encasing
this spirit-soul who has taken shelter of You, and may You thus perpetually nurture
and engladden me.

caitanya-candra tava päda-saroja-yugma / dåñöväpi ye tvayi vibho
na pareça-buddhim
kurvvanti moha-vaça-gä rasa-bhäva-hénäs / te mohitä vitatavaibhava-mäyayä te 5
caitanya-candra - O moon of Çré Caitanya; tava - Your; päda - feet; sara-ja lotus (pond-born); yugmam - pair; dåñövä - having seen; api - although; ye - who;
tvayi - unto You; vibho - O all-pervasive one; na - not; para-éça - Supreme Lord;
buddhim - intelligence; kurvanti - they do; moha-vaça-gä - overwhelmed by the
delusion; rasa - relationship with Kåñëa; bhäva-hénä - bereft of the ecstasy; te they; mohitä - bewildered; vitata - spread; vaibhava - magnificent; mäyayä - by
the illusory energy; te - Your.
O all-pervasive moon of Çré Caitanya, those who are overwhelmed by the folly of
ignorance, who are bereft of the ecstasy of a relationship with You, and who are
bewildered by the grandeur of Your illusory energy, are unable to accept You as the
Supreme Lord, even though they may see Your feet, soft as the lotus flower.

caitanya-candra na hi te vibudhä vidanti / pädäravinda-yugala kuta
eva cänye
yeñä mukunda dayase karuëärdra-mürtte / te tvä bhajanti
praëamanti vidanti nityam 6
caitanya-candra - O moon of Çré Caitanya; na - not; hi - indeed; te - they;
vibudhä - gods; vidanti - they know; päda-aravinda-yugalam - the pair of lotus
feet; kuta - what of?; eva - indeed; ca - and; anye - others; yeñäm - of whom;

[p.173]
mukunda - whose face is bright like the kunda flower; dayase - You give mercy;
karuëä-ärdra-mürte - O form of melted mercy; te - they; tväm - You; bhajanti they worship; praëamanti - they bow down; vidanti - they know; nityam always.
O moon of Çré Caitanya, since even the gods are certainly incapable of
comprehending the transcendental value of Your lotus feet, then what to speak of
others? O Lord Mukunda, whose face shines brightly like the kunda flower, Your
heart is melting with mercy. Those to whom You show that mercy can adore You,
offer obeisances unto You and know You always.

natvä vadämi tava päda-sahasra-patram / äjïä vibho bhavatu te
mama tatra çakti
bhüyäd yathä tava kathämåta-sära-pürëä / väëé vareëya nå-hare
karuëämåtäbdhe 7
natvä - having bowed down; vadämi - I address; tava - Your; päda-sahasrapatram - feet like a thousand-petalled lotus; äjïä - order; vibho - O all-pervasive
Lord; bhavatu - let it be; te - unto You; mama - my; tatra - there; çakti - potency;
bhüyät - may it be; yathä - as; tava - Your; kathä-amåta - nectar of the narrations;
sära - essence; pürnä - full; väëé - words; vareëya - desirable; nå-hare - O Lord
Hari in Your human-like form; karuëä - mercy; amåta-abdhe - O ocean of nectar.
Bowing down to Your feet, which are situated on a thousand-petalled lotus, I pray,
O all-pervasive Lord, may Your order endow my words with potency to distill fully
the essential nectar of Your pastimes. O my heart's desire! O Çré Hari in Your humanlike form! O ocean of undying compassion!

ägatya sva-gåhe kåñëo / hari premäçru-locana
sva-gåhe päöhayan nitya / brähmaëän karuëä-nidhi 8
ägatya - coming; sva-gåhe - in His home; kåñëa - all-attractive; hari - the
remover of inauspiciousness; prema-açru - tears of love; locana - eyes; sva-gåhe in His home; päöhayan - teaching; nityam - every day; brähmaëän - men who

[p.174]
know spirit; karuëä-nidhi - the jewel of mercy.
Çré Kåñëa Hari, His eyes brimming with tears of love, then entered His home. And
that ocean of compassion gave lessons daily to brähmaëas in that home.

ekadä sva-gåhe supta / rudanta sva-suta çacé
proväca vismitä sädhvé / kim ida tva virodiñi 9
ekadä - once; sva-gåhe - in His home; suptam - sleeping; rudantam - weeping;
sva-sutam - her son; çacé - Çacé Mätä; proväca - she said; vismitä - mystified;
sädhvé - the saintly lady; kim - what?; idam - this; tvam - You; virodiñi - You are
crying.
One day the saintly Çacé Devé saw that as her son slept in His room tears were
falling from His eyes. Mystified, she inquired, "Nimäi, why are You weeping?"

noväca kiïcit tac chrutvä / mätara prema-vihvala
çrémad-viçvambharo näthas / tadäsau cintitäbhavat 10
na - not; uväca - He said; kiïcit - anything; tat - that; çrutvä - having heard;
mätaram - to His mother; prema-vihvala - immersed in love; çrémat-viçvambhara the glorious maintainer of the universe; nätha - Lord; tadä - then; asau - she;
cintitä - thoughtful; abhavat - she became.
Viçvambhara heard her question, but being immersed in thoughts of Kåñëa-prema,
He said nothing. Then Çacé Devé became very thoughtful.

harer anugrahät käle / jïätvä sä prema-lakñaëam
bhakti yayäce govinde / tä çacé vinayänvitä 11
hare - of Hari; anugrahät - by the mercy; käle - at that time; jïätvä - having
understood; sä - she; prema-lakñaëam - the signs of love of God; bhaktim devotion; yayäce - she begged; govinde - unto Govinda; täm - that; çacé - Çacé

[p.175]
Devé; vinaya-anvitä - filled with meekness.
At that time she could understand by Hari's mercy that the symptoms she observed
in Viçvambhara were symptoms of prema, and very meekly Çacé begged Him to
award her also with devotion for Çré Govinda:

yatra tatra dhana präpya / mahya tad dattavän bhavän
premäkhya ki dhana labdha / gayäyä deva-durllabham 12
yatra tatra - whenever; dhanam - wealth; präpya - obtaining; mahyam - to me;
tat - that; dattavän - given; bhavän - Your grace; prema-äkhyam - known as
prema; kim - how?; dhanam - wealth; labdham - obtained; gayäyäm - in Gayä;
deva-durlabham - rarely obtained by the gods.
"Whenever in the past Your Grace received any wealth, You would always give it
to me. In Gayä You have acquired a wealth known as Kåñëa prema, which is
difficult to obtain even by the devas.

tan mä prayaccha tätädya / yady asti karuëä mayi
yathä kåñëa-rasämbhodhau / viharämi nirantaram 13
tat - that; mäm - to me; prayaccha - bestow; täta - dear boy; adya - today; yadi if; asti - there is; karuëä - mercy; mayi - on me; yathä - so; kåñëa-rasaambhodhau - in the ocean of mellows of Kåñëa; viharämi - I take pleasure;
nirantaram - ceaselessly.
"Dear son, if You feel any compassion for me, today please give me that prema. For
thus I may incessantly delight in the ocean of relishable relationships with Kåñëa."

iti tasyä vaca çrutvä / matu snehäd uväca täm
vaiñëavänugrahän mätas / tava tat sambhaviñyati 14
iti - thus; tasyä - her; vaca - words; çrutvä - hearing; matu - of His mother;

[p.176]
snehät - out of affection; uväca - He said; täm - to her; vaiñëava - of the devotees
of Viñëu; anugrahät - by the mercy; mäta - O mother; tava - for you; tat - that;
sambhaviñyati - it will be.
Hearing His mother's words, Gauräìga addressed her affectionately, "Dear mother,
by the mercy of the vaiñëavas, this your desire for prema will surely be satisfied."

tac chrutvä harñitä sädhvé / bhakti-yuktä babhüva sä
çrémac-caitanya-devo 'pi / brähmaëän präha sädaram 15
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; harñitä - joyous; sädhvé - the saintly lady; bhaktiyuktä - imbued with devotion; babhüva - she became; sä - she; çrémat-caitanyadeva; api - indeed; brähmaëän - knowers of Brahman; präha - He said; sa-ädaram
- with respect.
Hearing these words of her son, that saintly lady became jubilant and fixed in
devotion. Çré Caitanya-deva respectfully addressed the brähmaëas as follows:

mäträ me prärthita premä / harau tac cävadhéyatäm
asmin yayä sä labhate / hari-bhakti su-durllabhäm 16
mäträ - by mother; me - My; prärthita - prayed for; premä - love; harau - for
Hari; tat - that; ca - and; avadhéyatäm - let Your attention be fixed; asmin - on
this; yayä - whereby; sä - she; labhate - obtains; hari-bhaktim - devotion to Hari;
su-durlabhäm - very rarely obtained.
"My mother earnestly yearns to obtain love for Çré Hari. Kindly fix your hearts on
her prayer so that she may receive that most rare Hari-bhakti."

tac chrutvocuç ca te sarvve / bhaviñyati tavoditä
bhaktis tasyä jagannäthe / premäkhyä muni-durllabhä 17
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; ücu - they said; ca - and; te - they; sarve - all;

[p.177]
bhaviñyati - it will be; tava - Your; uditä - as spoken; bhakti - devotion; tasyä her; jagannäthe - unto Jagannätha; prema-äkhyä - known as prema; munidurlabhä - difficult to achieve for sages.
Hearing this, they all replied, "That loving devotion for the Lord of the universe of
which You have spoken shall certainly be hers, though it is obtained with difficulty
even by great sages."

tac chrutvä çré-çacé-devé / säkñäd-bhakti-sva-rüpiëé
labdhä harau dådhä bhakti / prema-pürëä babhüva ha 18
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; çré-çacé-devé - Çacé Mätä; säkñät - in person; bhaktisva-rüpiëé - the original form of devotion; labdhä - obtained; harau - to Hari;
dådhäm - firm; bhaktim - devotion; prema-pürëä - filled with love; babhüva - she
became; ha - assuredly.
When Çré Çacé Devé heard this, although she is herself personified bhakti, she
obtained ever-increasing unflinching devotion to Çré Hari, whereupon her love for
Him overflowed.

tato roditi sa kväpi / nänä-dhärä-paripluta
näse ca çleñma-dhäräbhyä / viplute sambabhüvatu 19
tata - then; roditi - wept; sa - He; kväpi - at times; nänä-dhärä-paripluta immersed by many currents; näse - in the nose; ca - and; çleñma-dhäräbhyäm with currents of phlegm; viplute - inundated; sambabhüvatu - came forth.
After that, at times Çré Gaura Hari wept and thus became covered by many streams
of tears, and from His nostrils came forth two currents of phlegm.

viluöhan bhütale deva / çuklämbara-dvijäçrame
nirantara çleñma-dhäräm / äkåñyäkåñya dürata 20

[p.178]
çuklämbara-brahmacäré / kñipaty aniçam eva hi
gauracandro rasenäpi / paripürëa sadä çuci 21
viluöhan - rolling about; bhü-tale - on the earth; deva - the Divine Person;
çuklämbara-dvija - of the brähmaëa; äçrame - at the hermitage; nirantaram ceaselessly; çleñma-dhäräm - the current of phlegm; äkåñya äkåñya - repeatedly
taking away; dürata - at a distant place; çuklämbara-brahmacäré; kñipati - throws
away; aniçam - continually; eva - indeed; hi - certainly; gaura-candra - the
Golden Moon; rasena - by the mellow; api - however; paripürëa - fully
complete; sadä - always; çuci - pure.
One day the Lord rolled on the earth at the äçrama of Çuklämbara Brahmacäré,
incessantly yielding currents of phlegm. Çuklämbara continually took away that
phlegm and disposed of it at a distant place. However, Gaura Candra, always full in
rasa remained pure.

roditi sa dina präpya / prabudhya sa rajané-mukhe
divaso 'yam iti präha / janä ücur iya kñapä 22
roditi - He weeps; sa - He; dinam - day; präpya - arriving; prabudhya awakening; sa - He; rajané-mukhe - at dusk; divasa - day; ayam - this; iti - thus;
präha - He said; janä - the people; ücu - they said; iyam - this; kñapä - night.
Throughout the day He would weep til dusk; then He finally became conscious of
the outside world and would inquire, "Is it day?" "It is night, the people replied,."

eva rajanyä premärdra / sarvvä rätri praroditi
praharaika divä yäte / tato 'sau bubudhe hari 23
evam - thus; rajanyäm - at night; prema-ärdra - heart tender with love; sarväm all; rätrim - night; praroditi - He weeps; prahara-ekam - one measurement of
three hours; divä - by day; yäte - He set out; tata - then; asau - He; bubudhe became conscious; hari - the remover of evil.

[p.179]
So with a heart made tender by prema, the Lord wept throughout the night. After
the day had advanced three hours, Hari awoke to external consciousness.

tata präha kiyad rätrir / varttate präha ta jana
divaso 'ya ati-premnä / na jänäti dina kñapäm 24
tata - then; präha - He said; kiyat - how much?; rätri - night; vartate - is it;
präha - he said; tam - Him; jana - a man; divasa - day; ayam - this; ati-premnä by great love; na - not; jänäti - He knew; dinam - day; kñapäm - night.
Then He asked, "What time of the night is it?" A someone replied, "It is now day."
Out of His great love for Kåñëa, Gaura Sundara became unaware of whether it was
day or night.

kvacic chrutvä harer näma / géta vä vihvala kñitau
patati çruti-mätreëa / daëavat kampate kvacit 25
kvacit - sometimes; çrutvä - hearing; hare näma - the mahä-mantra in
meditation; gétam - song; vä - or; vihvala - completely unaware of external
phenomena due to love of Kåñëa; kñitau - on the earth; patati - He falls; çrutimätreëa - simply by hearing; daëa-vat - like a rod; kampate - trembles; kvacit sometimes.
Sometimes merely by hearing the mahä-mantra chanted in meditation or in song,
He became immersed in Kåñëa consciousness. He would fall like a rod to the earth,
and at times His entire body would tremble.

kvacid gäyati govinda / kåñëa kåñëeti sädaram
sanna-kaëöha kvacit kampa-romäïcita-tanur bhåçam 26
kvacit - sometimes; gäyati - He sings; govinda - O awarder of joy to the cows;
kåñëa kåñëa; iti - thus; sa-ädaram - with respect; sanna-kaëöha - choked throat;

[p.180]
kvacit - sometimes; kampa - trembling; roma-aïcita - hairs bristling; tanu - body;
bhåçam - intensely.
Sometimes with great reverence and faltering voice He would sing, "O Govinda!
Kåñëa! Kåñëa!" Sometimes His body would quiver violently and all His hairs would
bristle profusely.

bhütvä vihvalatäm eti / kadäcit pratibudhyate
snätvä kadäcit püjä sa / karoti jagaté-pati 27
bhütvä - becoming; vihvalatäm - entranced; eti - He goes; kadäcit - sometimes;
pratibudhyate - He awoke; snätvä - having bathed; kadäcit - sometimes; püjäm worship; sa - He; karoti - performs; jagaté-pati - Master of all living entities.
After being thus entranced, He would sometimes awake to the external world.
Then the Lord of all worlds would bathe and offer worship to His family Deity.

nivedyännam bhagavate / tato bhuìkte tad-annakam
viprän kvacit päöhayati / rätrau gäyati nåtyati 28
nivedya - offering; annam - foods; bhagavate - to the all-opulent Lord; tata then; bhuìkte - He eats; tat-annakam - the Lord's food; viprän - learned
brähmaëas; kvacit - sometimes; päöhayati - He teaches; rätrau - at night; gäyati He sings; nåtyati - He dances.
Having offered foodstuffs to the Lord, He would then eat the remnants as
prasädam. Then for some time He would teach the brähmaëas, and at night He
would sing and dance.

eva bahu-vidhäkära / hare prema samädarät 29
evam - thus; bahu-vidhä - in many ways; äkäram - appearance; hare prema love for Hari; samädarät - by great devotion.

[p.181]
Thus in manifold ways, Gauräìga displayed the glory of love for Çré Hari by great
devotion.

kurvan loka-gurur loka-çikñä cakre sa nityaça
sa eva bhagavän kåñëo / lokänugraha-kämyayä 30
kurvan - making; loka-guru - teacher of the people; loka-çikñäm - lessons for
the people; cakre - made; sa - He; nityaça - constantly; sa - He; eva - surely;
bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; kåñëa - who ends the cycle of birth and death;
loka-anugraha - mercy for the people; kämyayä - because of desiring.
Through all His activities, the all-opulent Lord Gaura-Kåñëa, the guru of humanity,
always instructed them, seeking to show them mercy.

Thus ends the First Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Reveals His Ecstatic Moods," in
the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Second Sarga
varäha-äveça
The Lord Accepts the Ecstatic Mood of Varäha Avatära

çréväsa-paëitai särddha / tad-bhrätåbhir alaìkåtai
gacchan pathi harir vaçé-näda-çravaëa-vihvala 1
çréväsa-paëitai särdham - with the scholars headed by Çréväsa; tat-bhrätåbhi with his brothers; alaìkåtai - decorated; gacchan - walking; pathi - on the path;
hari - the remover of sin; vaçé-näda - the sound of the flute; çravaëa - hearing;
vihvala - overwhelmed.

[p.182]
Once while Çré Gaura Hari was walking on a path in the company of Çréväsa Paëita
and his brothers, who appeared like ornaments of the Lord, He heard the sound of a
flute, and thinking of Govinda, He became entranced.

papäta daëavat bhümau / mohito 'bhüt kñaëa puna
rauti nänä-vidha devas / tv acireëa vibudhyate 2
papäta - He fell; daëavat - like a rod; bhümau - on the earth; mohita bewildered; abhüt - He was; kñaëam - a moment; puna - again; rauti - He cried;
nänä-vidha - in many ways; deva - the Lord; tu - but; acireëa - before long;
vibudhyate - He awoke.
Enraptured the Lord swooned, falling like a stick to the ground. After a short time
He awoke and cried out for Kåñëa, addressing Him by many names.

äçéryuïjan dvijägreñu / prahasan ruciränana
çiñöair upeto mumude / kadäcil laukiké kriyäm 3
karoti kamalädhyakño / deha-yäträ-prasiddhaye
navadvépa-viläsa ca / darçayan jagaté-pati 4
äçéryuïjan - offering blessings; dvija-agreñu - to the chiefs of the brähmaëas;
prahasan - laughing; rucira-anana - lustrous face; çiñöai - with the gentlemen;
upeta - in company; mumude - He enjoyed; kadäciö - sometimes; laukikém ordinary; kriyäm - activities; karoti - He makes; kamalä-adhyakña - master of the
goddess of fortune; deha-yäträ - bodily maintenance; prasiddhaye - (on the plea)
of executing; navadvépa-viläsam - pastimes in the town of nine islands; ca - and;
darçayan - showing; jagaté-pati - Lord of the universe.
After offering blessings to the chiefs among the brähmaëas, Lord Gaura with His
lustrous face laughed, enjoying the company of the gentlemen. As the Lord of the
universe and husband of Lakñmé occasionally acted on the plea of the fulfillment of
His bodily affairs, He displayed His pastimes in Navadvépa.

[p.183]
çréväsa-paëitai särddha / çri-rämena mahätmanä
tayo puryyä mukundena / vaidyenänyena sa prabhu 5
nanartta ca jagau kåñëa-gétam hari-paräyaëai
rätrau rätrau divä premnä / pulakäïcita-vigraha 6
çréväsa-paëitai särdham - with Çréväsa Paëita; çri-rämena - with Çré Räma;
mahä-ätmanä - with the great soul; tayo - amongst those two; puryäm - in the
house; mukundena - with Mukunda; vaidyena - with the physician; anyena - with
another; sa - He; prabhu - the Master; nanarta - danced; ca - and; jagau - He
sang; kåñëa-gétam - songs of Kåñëa; hari-paräyaëai - with they who were
dedicated to Hari; rätrau rätrau - during night after night; divä - by day; premnä with love; pulaka-aïcita-vigraha - hairs bristling in rapture.
In the house of Çréväsa Paëita night after night and also at times throughout the
day, hairs the Master thrilling with rapture would continously dance and lovingly
sing songs of Kåñëa together with Çréväsa, the great soul Çréräma, and another
physician named Mukunda, all of whom were exclusively devoted to Çré Hari.

ekadä nija-gehe sa / vasan premäti-vihvala
vasämi kutra tiñöhämi / katha me syän matir harau 7
ekadä - once; nija-gehe - in His dwelling; sa - He; vasan - residing; prema-ativihvala - wholly immersed in love; vasämi - I reside; kutra - where?; tiñöhämi - I
stay; katham - how?; me - My; syät - it may be; mati - attention; harau - on Hari.
Once while He was sojourning at home, Çacé-suta became overwhelmed by love for
Kåñëa and exclaimed, "Oh! Where shall I dwell and where shall I stay, that I may fix
my mind upon Hari?"

iti vihvalita devo / nämnä ta präha sädaram
harer açam avehi tva / ätmäna påthivé-tale 8

[p.184]
iti - thus; vihvalitam - entranced; deva - the Lord; nämnä - by name; tam - Him;
präha - said; sa-ädaram - with respect; hare - of Hari; açam - plenary portion;
avehi - You must know; tvam - You; ätmänam - self; påthivé-tale - on the earthplanet.
While He was thus perplexed, a celestial being respectfully addressed Him by
name, saying, "He Bhagavän! You should know that You are Yourself the personal
expansion of Çré Hari on earth.

avatérëo 'si bhagavan / lokänä prema-siddhaye
kheda mä kuru yajïo 'ya / kértanäkhya kñitau kalau 9
tvat-prasädät susampanno / bhaviñyati na saçaya
eva çrutvä gira devyä / harña-yukto babhüva sa 10
avatérëa - descended; asi - You are; bhagavan - O Lord; lokänäm - of the
people; prema-siddhaye - for the perfection of love; khedam - despondency; mä not; kuru - do; yajïa - sacrifice; ayam - this; kértana-äkhya - famed as kértana;
kñitau - on the earth; kalau - in the age of quarrel; tvat-prasädät - by Your mercy;
su-sampanna - supremely successful; bhaviñyati - it will be; na saçaya - no doubt;
evam çrutvä - thus hearing; giram - the words; devyä - of the goddess; harñayukta - filled by joy; babhüva - became; sa - He.
"You have descended to bring people the highest perfection of life which is Kåñëaprema. Do not be despondent. This sacrifice of the chanting of Kåñëa's names on the
earth in this age of Kali will be supremely successful by Your mercy. Of this there is
no doubt." Upon hearing these words of the goddess, the Lord became filled with
joy.

kadäcid daiva-yogena / harir dénänukampayä
yayau vaidya-muräre sa / väöyä premärdra-locana 11

[p.185]
kadäcit - once; daiva-yogena - by Divine arrangement; hari - the dispeller of
evil; déna-anukampayä - by compassion for the lowly; yayau - He went; vaidyamuräre - of the physician Muräri; sa - He; väöyäm - in the garden; prema-ärdra gentle with love; locana - eyes.
Once by His divine arrangement, Çré Hari, whose eyes are tender with love, due to
compassion for lowly-minded persons, came to the house of the physician Muräri.

devatä-gåha-madhye sampraviçyopäviçad vibhu
äpluta prema-dhäräbhir / nirjharair iva parvata 12
devatä-gåha-madhye - in the temple; sampraviçya - entering; upäviçat - He sat
down; vibhu - the self-controlled; äpluta - flooded; prema-dhäräbhi - by currents
of love; nirjharai - by waterfalls; iva - like; parvata - a mountain.
The sense-controlled Lord entered the Deity's temple-room and sat down,
becoming flooded by currents of love that appeared like waterfalls gushing down a
mountainside.

aho mä danta-yugmena / tudaty eña mahä-bala
varäha parvvatäkära / ity uktväpasaran kramät 13
aho - Oh!; mäm - me; danta-yugmena - with His pair of tusks; tudati - He is
striking; eña - this; mahä-bala - very powerful; varäha - the boar; parvata-äkära appearance of a mountain; iti - thus; uktvä - saying; apasaran - moving away;
kramät - gradually.
Then Gaura spoke, "Oh! This very powerful boar, appearing like a great mountain,
is attacking me with His two tusks!" So saying, He slowly backed away.

aho mäm hi tudaty eña / daçanai çükarottama
ity uktväpasasäräçu / punar eva mahäprabhu 14

[p.186]
aho - Oh! mäm - me; hi - certainly; tudati - He is striking; eña - this; daçanai with His tusks; çükara-uttama - best of boars; iti - thus; uktvä - saying; apasasära
- went away; äçu - swiftly; puna - further; eva - certainly; mahä-prabhu - the great
Master.
"Oh! This best among boars is striking me with His tusks!" So saying, Mahäprabhu
backed away more swiftly.

tata kñaëeneçvaratva / bhävena darçayan svayam
jänubhyä bhümim älambya / kara-yugmena sa vrajan 15
tata - then; kñaëena - for a moment; éçvaratva - the nature of the Supreme
Lord; bhävena - by the mood; darçayan - showing; svayam - personally;
jänubhyäm - with His knees; bhümim - the ground; älambya - supporting; karayugmena - with His hands; sa - He; vrajan - going.
Then after a moment He displayed an ecstatic mood of the Supreme Lord,
appearing in the form of a boar. Thus He clambered about the ground on His hands
and knees.

vartulämbuja-netreëa / huìkäreëänunädayan
dadhära daçanägreëa / paittala jala-pätrakam 16
vartula - circular; ambuja-netreëa - with lotus eyes; huìkäreëa - with roaring;
anunädayan - echoing; dadhära - He held; daçana-agreëa - with the tips of His
tusks; paittalam - brass; jala-pätrakam - waterpot.
His lotus eyes became big and round, and His roaring reverberated loudly as He
held aloft a brass waterpot with the tips of His teeth.

kñaëam unmukhatä kåtvä / paçcäd dhåtvä tu paittalam
pätram üce svarüpa me / vadasveti murärikam 17

[p.187]
kñaëam - for a moment; unmukhatäm - raising His face upwards; kåtvä making; paçcät - on the back; dhåtvä - holding; tu - indeed; paittalam - brass;
pätram - pot; üce - He said; sva-rüpam - original form; me - My; vadasva speak; iti - thus; murärikam - to little Muräri.
For a moment He thus raised His face upwards and then took the brass pot in His
hand as He commanded this lowly Muräri, "Describe this original form of mine."

sa proväca naman bhümau / vismito dåçya éçvara
näha vedmi svarüpa te / bhagavan vanajekñaëa 18
sa - he; proväca - said; naman - bowing; bhümau - on the earth; vismita astonished; dåçya - worthy to be seen; éçvara - the Supreme Controller; na - not;
aham - I; vedmi - I comprehend; sva-rüpam - original form; te - Your; bhagavan O all-opulent Lord; vanaja-ékñaëa - whose eyes are like the lotus of the forest.
Bowing down on the earth, Muräri spoke in wonder, "O illustrious Lord whose
eyes resemble the blue lotus of the forest! You are the Supreme Controller of all
things, and are indeed the worthy object of my vision, yet I am unable to
comprehend this original form of Yours."

svayam evätmanätmäna / vettha tva puruñottama
iti gétokta-vacasä / vadanta sa puna puna 19
svayam - Yourself; eva - certainly; ätmanä - by Your Self; ätmänam - Self; vettha
- You know; tvam - You; puruña-uttama - O transcendental Person; iti - thus; gétä
- Bhagavad Gétä; ukta - spoken; vacasä - with the words; vadantam - saying; sa he; puna puna - again and again.
Then again and again Muräri uttered the words spoken by Arjuna to Lord Kåñëa in
the Bhagavad Gétä, "Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own potencies, O
Supreme Person!"

tatas ta bhagavän präha / puna suçlakñnayä girä

[p.188]
ki mä jänäti vedo 'ya / vaidya präha sa ta prabhum 20
tata - then; tam - him; bhagavän - the Lord; präha - said; puna - again; suçlakñnayä - with very charming accents; girä - with accents; kim - how?; mäm Me; jänäti - it knows; veda - the Vedic scriptures; ayam - this; vaidya - the
physician; präha - said; sa - he; tam - Him; prabhum - the Master.
Then the Lord, the reservoir of all opulence, again addressed Muräri Gupta in a
very gentle tone, "What can the Veda know of Me?" The physician replied to Him as
follows:

vedasya çaktir nästi tvä / vaktu guhyo 'si sarvvadä
tac chrutvä bhagavän präha / vedo viambaty alam 21
mä vakty-apäëi-pädeti / vadan småtväbravéd idam
bhagavän veda-sära-jïa / sarvva-vedärtha-nirmätä 22
vedasya - of the Veda; çakti - ability; na asti - there is not; tväm - You; vaktum to describe; guhya - confidential; asi - You are; sarvadä - always; tat - that; çrutvä
- hearing; bhagavän - the lord; präha - said; veda - the Veda; viambati - he
mocks; alam - enough; mäm - Me; vakti - speech; apäëi-päda - without hands
and feet; iti - thus; vadan - saying; småtvä - recalled; abravét - He said; idam this; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; veda-sära-jïa - knower of the juicy
essence of the Vedas; sarva-veda-artha - the meaning of all Vedas; nirmätä author.
"The Veda has no ability to speak of You. Your nature is always confidential."
Hearing this, the Lord said, "The Veda mocks Me, for it calls Me handless and
legless." Then the Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all opulences, who is
conversant with the very essence of the Vedas and is indeed the author of all Vedic
literature, summoned the Vedas to His mind and recited the following verse:

apäëi-pädo javano gåhétä / paçyaty acakñu sa çåëoty akarëa

[p.189]
sa vetti viçva na hi tasya vettä / tam ähur agrya puruña puräëam 23
apäëi-päda - without hands and feet; javana - fleet as the mind; gåhétä - taker;
paçyati - He sees; acakñu - without eyes; sa - He; çåëoti - He hears; akarëa without ears; sa - He; vetti - knows; viçvam - the universe; na - not; hi - certainly;
tasya - of Him; vettä - knower; tam - Him; ähu - they say; agryam - chief;
puruñam - person; puräëam - ancient.
"He is without hands and feet, yet He travels as swift as the mind and accepts all
that is offered to Him. He sees without eyes and hears without ears. He knows the
entirety of this universe, but no one knows Him. Sages call Him the primeval
Person."

iti veda-vaco devo / hasann eväbhyabhäñata
na hi jänäti vedo mä / iti niçcitam eva hi 24
iti - thus; veda-vaca - words of the Vedas; deva - the Divine Lord; hasan smiling; eva - certainly; abhyabhäñata - He declared; na - not; hi - surely; jänäti knows; veda - the Veda; mäm - Me; iti - thus; niçcitam - sure; eva hi - surely.
The Divine Lord was smiling as He recited these words of the Vedas, and then He
declared, "The Vedas cannot comprehend Me. This is undeniably true."

ambañöha präha bhagavan / karunä karttum arhasi
ta präha bhagavän deva / premä mayi dayä-maya 25
ambañöha - the physician; präha - he said; bhagavan - O Lord; karunäm mercy; kartum - to do; arhasi - You ought; tam - to him; präha - He said;
bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; deva - the Supreme Divinity; premä - love; mayi
- for Me; dayä-maya - merciful.
The physician said, "O Bhagavän, show Your mercy to me!" The merciful allopulent Personality of Godhead replied, "May you have love for Me."

[p.190]
ity uktvä sa smita-mukho / jagäma nija-mandiram
çrémän viçvambharo devo / hari-kértana-tat-para 26
iti - so; uktvä - saying; sa - He; smita-mukha - with a smiling face; jagäma departed; nija-mandiram - to His own home; çrémät - illustrious; viçvambhara maintainer of the universe; deva - Divine Lord; hari-kértana - chanting the
names of Hari; tat-para - wholly absorbed in that.
So saying with a smiling face, resplendent Viçvambhara Deva then departed for His
own home, wholly absorbed in Hari-kirtana.

apare dyu paëitasya / çréväsasya pure vasan
vyäkhyä cakära çlokasya / vakñyamänasya tac chåëu 27
apare dyu - on the next day; paëitasya çréväsasya - of Çréväsa Paëita; pure - in
the abode; vasan - staying; vyäkhyäm - explanation; cakära - He made; çlokasya of a verse; vakñyamänasya - which He uttered; tat - that; çåëu - please hear.
On the following day, while Gaura was staying in the home of Çréväsa Paëita, He
recited a verse and then elucidated upon it. Please hear that.

harer näma harer näma / harer nämaiva kevalam
kalau nästy eva nästy eva / nästy eva gatir anyathä 28
hare - of Hari; näma - the names; eva - certainly; kevalam - only; kalau - in the
age of quarrel; na - not; asti - there is; eva - certainly; gati - path; anyathä alternative.
"In the age of quarrel, the only means for realization of our relationship with God
is chanting the names of Hari, chanting the names of Hari, chanting the names of
Hari. There is certainly no other way. There is no other way. There is no other way."

`nä' pumän ädi-puruña / kaläv asty eva rüpavän

[p.191]
näma-svarüpiëa ta tu / jänéhi sa tu `kevalam' 29
nä - the word `nä'; pumän - person; ädi-puruña - the original personality; kalau in the age of quarrel; asti - there is; eva - certainly; rüpavän - in form; nämasvarüpiëam - the original form of the name; tam - Him; tu - indeed; jänéhi - you
must understand; sa - He; tu - indeed; kevalam - the word `kevalam.'
"The word `nä' means a person and indicates Çré Hari, the original person, who
Himself appears in the age of Kali. You must understand the form of His holy names
is that original form. They are indeed non-different from Him. This is the intended
meaning of the word `kevalam.'

vara-traya harer näma / dåhärtha sarva-dehinäm
`eva' käraç ca jévänä / päpänä näça-hetave 30
vara-trayam - three times; hare - of Hari; näma - the name; dåha - firm; artha wealth; sarva-dehinäm - for all embodied beings; eva-kära - the word `eva'; ca and; jévänäm - of the living beings; päpänäm - of the sins; näça-hetave - for the
purpose of destruction.
"The reason for repeating thrice the words `harer näma' is to establish conclusively
that only the names of Hari award actual benefit to all embodied beings in the age of
Kali. The word `eva' is also repeated three times to emphasize that the Lord's name
destroys the sins of all living beings.

sarvva-tattva-prakäçärtha / `kevala' manyate ca hi
prärabdha-karma-nirvväëa / kathyate 'dvaita-vädibhi 31
sarva-tattva-prakäça - revealing all truths; artham - the meaning; kevalam - the
word `kevalam'; manyate - it is considered; ca - but; hi - indeed; prärabdhakarma - activities which have been begun; nirväëa - extinguishing; kathyate - it
is said; advaita-vädibhi - by the proponents of exclusive monism.
"The word `kevalam' also implies definitely that the names of Çré Hari reveal all

[p.192]
truths. In other words, since His names are (kevalam) none other than Kåñëa
Himself, they can therefore reveal all truths. Whereas the proponents of exclusive
monism state that the intended meaning of `kevalam' is nirväëa, extinguishing the
seeds of fruitive work.

bhaved iti ca bodhärtha / kaivalya kevala småtam
kåñëa-prema-rasäsväda-präpaka karuëä-mayam 32
bhavet - this may be; iti - thus; ca - and; bodha-artham - enlightened meaning;
kaivalyam - impersonal oneness; kevalam - the word `kevalam'; småtam - is
considered; kåñëa-prema-rasa - the mellows of love for Kåñëa; äsväda relishing; präpakam - causing to arrive at; karuëä-mayam - merciful.
"They have (erroneously) taken the meaning of `kevalam' to be `kaivalyam,' or
becoming one with brahman, the impersonal aspect of the Absolute Truth. Whereas
(vaiñëavas state that) the names of Hari are actually His mercy-avatära, and they
cause one to relish the mellows of Kåñëa-prema.

tat-svarüpa harer näma / yo 'nyad eva vadet pumän
tasya nästy eva nästy eva / gatir ity avadat svayam 33
tat-svarüpam - the original form of the Lord; hare näma - the name of Hari; ya who; anyat - another; eva - indeed; vadet - he should say; pumän - a man; tasya his; na asti - there is not; eva - certainly; na asti - there is not; eva - certainly; gati
- a way; iti - thus; avadat - He said; svayam - Himself.
"Therefore the name of Hari is His original form. If a man should assert otherwise,
then for him, Veda Vyäsa has personally emphasized this point three times, `There
is no other way, there is no other way, there is no other way.'"

ity asau çükaro brüte / sarvva-deva-maya pumän
ity uktvä narttana cakre / kérttana ca viçeñata 34
iti - thus; asau - He; çükara - the boar; brüte - He said; sarva-deva-maya - the

[p.193]
personification of all demigods; pumän - Supreme Spirit; iti - thus; uktvä saying; nartanam - dancing; cakre - He performed; kértanam - chanting; ca - and;
viçeñata - with superlativeness.
So spoke Mahäprabhu, the personification of all the devas, in His form of the boar.
After speaking thus, He began to dance and sing the names of Hari with superlative
feeling.

etad ya çåëuyän nitya / kértayed vä samähita
harau prema bhavet tasya / vipäpnä ca bhaved dhruvam 35
etat - this; ya - who; çåëuyät - may hear; nityam - regularly; kértayet - may
recite; vä - or; samähita - with great attention; harau - for Hari; prema - love;
bhavet - it can be; tasya - his; vipäpnä - free from sin; ca - and; bhavet - it may be;
dhruvam - fixed.
If someone hears or recites these narrations with fixed attention, love for Lord Çré
Hari awakens within his heart. He becomes fixed in Kåñëa consciousness and is
freed from the life of sin.

çrémac-caitanya-pädäbje / prabhu-buddhir dådhä bhavet
ante caitanya-devasya / småtir bhavati çäçvaté 36
çrémat-caitanya - of Lord Caitanya; päda-abje - at the lotus feet; prabhu-buddhi having intelligence of Gaura as master; dådhä - fixed; bhavet - it can be; ante - at
the end; caitanya-devasya - of Caitanya-deva; småti - remembrance; bhavati - it
becomes; çäçvaté - perpetual.
One's intelligence becomes firmly established in the understanding of their
constitutional position of service to Çré Caitanya's lotus feet, and at the end of life,
one will attain perpetual remembrance of Çré Caitanya-deva.

Thus ends the Second Sarga entitled "The Lord Accepts the Ecstatic Mood of
Varäha Avatära," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

[p.194]
* * *
Third Sarga
megha-niväraëam
Çré Caitanya Disperses the Thunder-clouds

atha praviöo nija-veçmani prabhur / babhau niçä-nätha-sahasrarociä
uväca cätraitya vasanti ke janäç / catur-mukhaù aë-mukha-païcavaktriëaù 1
atha - then; praviöaù - entered; nija-veçmani - in His own home; prabhuù - the
Master; babhau - He shone; niçä-nätha - lord of the night; sahasra-rociä - with a
thousand rays; uväca - He said; ca - and; atra - here; etya - coming; vasanti - they
dwell; ke - who?; janäù - people; catu-mukhaù - four-faced; aö-mukha - six-faced;
païca-vaktriëaù - five-faced.
Prabhu entered His home shining with a thousand rays like the lord of the night.
Then He inquired, "Who are these people who have come to reside here, they who
are four-faced, six-faced and five-faced?"

çréväsa-nämä dvija-varyya-sattamaù / çrutvävadat ta vibudhäù
samägatäù
brahmeçvarau aò-vadanädayaù prabho / tvä sevitu premarasämtäbdhim 2
çréväsa nämä - of the name Çréväsa; dvija-varya-sattamaù - best of the
brähmaëas; çrutvä - hearing; avadat - he said; tam - to Him; vibudhäù - gods;
samägatäù - have come; brahmä-éçvarau - Brahmä and Çiva; aò-vadana -

[p.195]
Kärttikeya; ädayaù - headed by; prabho - O Master; tväm - You; sevitum - to
serve; prema-rasa - mellows of love; amta-abdhim - ocean of nectar.
That most pure of pure-hearted brähmaëas named Çréväsa replied, "Prabhu, the
gods headed by Brahmä, Kärttikeya and Çiva have come to render service to You,
who resemble a mellifluous ambrosial ocean of prema."

tataù para-dine präpte / çuddha-devo varäsane
upaviçya sva-bhaktasya / gätre padbhyä samäspçat 3
tataù - then; para-dine - on the next day; präpte - came; çuddha-deva - the god
of purity; vara-äsane - on a fine seat; upaviçya - sitting; sva-bhaktasya - of His
own devotees; gätre - on the body; padbhyäm - with His feet; samäspçat touched.
When the morrow came, the Lord of pure devotional service sat on an exalted seat
amidst His bhaktas and touched His feet to their bodies.

çréväsa-paëòitädyäs te / praëamya çirasä harim
babrus tac-caraëe bhakti / prema-rüpä su-durlabhäm 4
çréväsa-paëòita-ädyäù - headed by Çréväsa; te - they; praëamya - bowing down;
çirasä - with the head; harim - to Hari; babruù - they prayed; tat-caraëe - to
those feet; bhaktim - devotion; prema-rüpäm - loving nature; su-durlabhäm most rarely achieved.
Beginning with Çréväsa Paëita, all of them bowed their heads to the ground before
Çré Hari and prayed for loving devotion to those same feet, for such devotion is the
treasure most rarely obtained in this world.

dadau tebhyo varän devo / yatheöän bhakta-vatsalaù
çuklämbara-brahmacäré / tam üce puruarabham 5

[p.196]
dadau - He gave; tebhyaù - to them; varän - boons; devaù - the Lord; yathä-iöän as desired; bhakta-vatsalaù - affectionate to the devotees; çuklämbarabrahmacäré; tam - Him; üce - he said; purua-abham - best of persons.
The Lord, feeling affectionate to His devotees, awarded to each of them the boons
which they coveted. Then Çuklämbara Brahmacäré addressed that best of persons:

bhagavan mathurä dvärävaté gatväti-duùkhitam
mä jïätvä dehi me prema-bhakti ta präha sa prabhuù 6
bhagavan - O all opulent Lord; mathuräm; dvärävatém - Dvärakä; gatvä - gone;
atiduùkhitam - very unhappy; mäm - me; jïätvä - knowing; dehi - give; me - to
me; prema-bhaktim - loving devotion; tam - to him; präha - He said; saù - He;
prabhuù - the Master.
"O all-opulent Lord, You know that although I have visited Mathurä and Dväravaté,
I remain very unhappy. Therefore please award prema-bhakti unto me to free me
from this misery." Prabhu replied to him:

jambukäù ki na gacchanti / tatra ki tena me bhavet
tac chrutvaiväpatad bhümau / tam uväca janärddanaù 7
jambukäù - jackals; kim - do they?; na - not; gacchanti - are going; tatra - in
this case; kim - why?; tena - by this; me - for Me; bhavet - it should be; tat - that;
çrutvä - hearing; eva - indeed; apatat - he fell; bhümau - on the ground; tam - to
him; uväca - said; jana-ardanaù - He who inspires the hearts of all people.
"Jackals also travel to those places, do they not? Then for Me what is the value of
your journeying ?" Hearing this, Çuklämbara fell to the ground and Janärdana
Caitanya said to him:

bhavatv adyaiva te premä / tadä tat kaëam eva hi
ruroda caraëe viëor / nipatya prema-vihvalaù 8

[p.197]
bhavatu - let it be; adya eva - this very day; te - your; premä - love; tadä - then;
tat - that; kaëam - instant; eva - very; hi - indeed; ruroda - he wept; caraëe - at
the feet; viëoù - of Viñëu; nipatya - falling; prema-vihvalaù - overwhelmed by
love.
"So be it! May you attain prema this very day!" The brahmacäré instantly became
overwhelmed by the influence of ecstatic love of God and again fell weeping at the
feet of Viñëu.

tatas te höa-manasas / tena särddha mudänvitäù
jaguù këasya gétäni / nämäni ca muhur muhuù 9
tataù - then; te - they; höa-manasaù - jubilant minds; tena - with Him; särdham in company; mudä-anvitäù - filled with joy; jaguù - they sang; këasya - of Kåñëa;
gétäni - songs; nämäni - names; ca - and; muhuù muhuù - again and again.
Then, in the company with Gaura Hari, the bhaktas sang songs made of Çré Kåñëa's
names, and as they repeated them again and again their hearts filled with exultation.

gadädharo mahä-präjïo / brähmaëaù sat-kulodbhavaù
prema-bhaktaç ca tat-päda-sannikare 'bhitiöhati 10
gadädharaù; mahä-präjïaù - very wise; brähmaëaù - transcendentalist; sat-kulaudbhavaù - born of pure lineage; prema-bhaktaù - devotee in pure love; ca - and;
tat-päda-sannikare - nearby His feet; abhitiöhati - remained.
Born of pure lineage, the very wise brähmaëa named Gadädhara was a devotee
absorbed in pure love for the Lord and always remained near His feet.

tena särddha rajanyä sa / tithann üce çubhäkaram
dätavya bhavatä prätar / vaiëavebhyaù prasädakam 11

[p.198]
tena - with him; särdham - in company; rajanyäm - in the night; saù - he;
tithan - staying; üce - He said; çubha-akaram - pleasing words; dätavyam - should
be given; bhavatä - by your honor; prätaù - early; vaiëavebhyaù - to the
vaiñëavas; prasädakam - a little mercy.
Once as he stayed in company with Çré Gaura by night, the Lord spoke pleasantly
to Him, "At sunrise, your grace should distribute a little prasäda to all the
vaiñëavas."

ity uktvä gätra-mälyäni / dadau tasya kare hariù
tataù prabhäte vimale / te sarvve samupägatäù 12
yasmai yasmai ca yad datta / tat tasmai sampradattavän
tatas te höa-manasaù / snätvä sura-nadé-jale 13
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; gätra-mälyäni - the garlands on His body; dadau - He
gave; tasya - his; kare - in the hand; hariù - the remover of sin; tataù - then;
prabhäte - at dawn; vimale - spotless; te - they; sarve - all; samupägatäù - came;
yasmai yasmai - unto each of whom; ca - and; yat - what; dattam - given; tat that; tasmai - to him; sampradattavän - bestowed; tataù - then; te - they; höamanasaù - of joyous hearts; snätvä - bathed; sura-nadé - of the river of sages; jale in the water.
So saying, Çré Hari placed the garlands from His body in Gadädhara's hand. Then
in the pure light of dawn, when the bhaktas all arrived, Gadädhara distributed to
each of them whatever the Lord had given him. Next, with joyous hearts they bathed
in the water of the river of the gods.

püjayitvä jagannätha / naivedya viniyujya ca
punas ta deva-deveçam / äjagmur muditäçayäù 14
püjayitvä - having worshipped; jagat-nätham - the Lord of the universe;
naivedyam - eatables; viniyujya - offering; ca - and; punaù - again; tam - Him;

[p.199]
deva-deva-éçam - controller of the God of gods; äjagmuù - they became; muditaäçayäù - took shelter of joy.
Having first worshipped their family Deities of the Lord of the universe and having
offered eatables to Him, everyone again joyously returned to Gaura Hari, who is the
Master of even Viñëu, the God of gods.

gadädharaù pratyaha ta / candanenänulepanam
ktvä mälyädi gätreu / dadäti satata mudä 15
gadädharaù - the devotional potency; prati-aham - daily; tam - Him; candanena
- with sandal pulp; anulepanam - anointing; ktvä - performing; mälya - garlands;
ädi - beginning with; gätreu - on the limbs; dadäti - he gave; satatam continuously; mudä - with joy.
Every day Gadädhara happily anointed the Lord's limbs with pulp of sandal and
frequently made presentations of pleasing articles such as flower-garlands.

çayanéye ghe çayyä / ktvä tat-sannidhau sukham
svapiti çraddhayä yukta / çëu tasyämta vacaù 16
çayanéye ghe - in the bedroom; çayyäm - bed; ktvä - made; tat-sannidhau - in
front of Him; sukham - happily; svapiti - slept; çraddhayä - with faith; yuktam imbued; çëu - please listen; tasya - his; amtam - nectarean; vacaù - words.
In the sleeping chamber, Gadädhara would faithfully prepare the Lord's bed in His
presence and then happily sleep near Him. Now hear with faith the words of nectar
(which he would sing).

yathä kvacid vraje ratna-mandire këa-sannidhau
çayyä vidhäya çré-rädhä / svapiti prema-samplutä 17
yathä - as; kvacit - sometime; vraje - in Vraja; ratna-mandire - in a jewel

[p.200]
temple; këa-sannidhau - in front of Kåñëa; çayyäm - bed; vidhäya - prepared; çrérädhä; svapiti - She slept; prema-samplutä - immersed in love.
As sometimes in the land of Vraja, within a jewelled mansion, Çré Rädhä prepared
Çré Kåñëa's bed in His presence and then slept next to Him immersed in loving
sentiments (thus in Navadvépa, Gadädhara does so for Çré Gauräìga).

säyähne mudito devais / taiù särdha kérttanotsukaù 18
säya-ahne - at dusk; muditaù - delighted; devaiù - with those godly men; taiù with them; särdham - in company; kértana-utsukaù - eager for kértana.
Every day at sunset, the son of Çacé eagerly performed kértana in the company of
those divine personalities who were His associates.

te 'pi saìkérttanänanda-mattäç ca nantu jaguù
çrémad-viçvambhareëäpi / paramänanda-nirvtäù 19
te - they; api - also; saìkértana-änanda-mattäù - mad with the joy of kértana; ca
- and; nantuù - they danced; jaguù - they sang; çrémat-viçvambhareëa - with
resplendent Viçvambhara; api - also; parama-änanda - transcendental bliss;
nirvtäù - delight.
And as they danced and sang, they also became intoxicated in the joy of saìkértana,
and along with resplendent Viçvambhara, everyone tasted the delights of
transcendental bliss.

kadäcid ävte vyomni / ghanair gambhéra-nisvanaiù
vidyotite tatas tävat / säka ca stanyitnubhiù 20
kadäcit - once; ävte - covered; vyomni - in the sky; ghanai - by clouds;
gambhéra-nisvanaiù - with deep rumblings; vidyotite - illumined by lightning;
tataù - then; tävat - so much; säkam - with; ca - and; stanyitnubhiù - with
thunderclaps.

[p.201]
One day the sky became fully covered with clouds that made deep rumblings, and
it was brightly illumined by lightning and accompanied by thunderclaps.

vaiëavä duùkhitäù sarvve / vighno 'ya samupasthitaù
meghä hareù kérttanake / 'bhavaç cintäparä iti 21
vaiëaväù - the devotees of Viñëu; duùkhitäù - unhappy; sarve - all; vighna obstacle; ayam - this; samupasthitaù - come to be; meghä - clouds; hareù - of
Hari; kértanake - in the glorification; abhavan - they became; cintä-parä absorbed in anxiety; iti - thus.
All of the vaiñëavas became unhappy, for the clouds were creating an impediment
to the Hari-kértana, and thus they became overwhelmed by anxiety.

tadä tasmin samäyäto / ghétvä mandirä hariù
svakän ktärthayan këa / jagau sa sva-janaiù saha 22
tadä - then; tasmin - in that situation; samäyätaù - coming; ghétvä understanding; mandiräm - temple; hariù; svakän - own men; kta-arthayan satisfying; këam - the all-attractive Lord; jagau - He sang; saù - He; sva-janaiù with His own people; saha - together.
Understanding the situation, Çré Hari came to the temple and gave great
satisfaction to His devotees as He sang the names of Çré Kåñëa in their company.

tato marudbhir meghaughäù / khaëòitäs te dig-antaram
bhejur babhüva vimala / nabhaç candräçu-raïjitam 23
tataù - then; marudbhiù - by the winds; megha-aughäù - multitude of clouds;
khaëòitäù - dispersed; te - they; dik-antaram - space; bhejuù - they distributed;
babhüva - was; vimalam - spotless; nabhaù - sky; candra-açu - rays of the moon;
raïjitam - pleasing.

[p.202]
At that, the winds suddenly dispersed the thunderclouds and distributed them
through outer space, and the pleasing rays of the moon then shone in a cloudless
sky.

tataù saìkérttana-paraiù / sädhubhiù saha sa prabhuù
nanarta päda-kaöakai / raëac-caraëa-paìkajaù 24
tataù - then; saìkértana; paraiù - absorbed in; sädhubhiù - by the saints; saha together; saù - He; prabhuù - the Master; nanarta - danced; päda-kaöakaiù - with
golden anklets; raëat - ringing; caraëa-paìkajaù - lotus feet.
As the sädhus became absorbed in saìkértana, Mahäprabhu danced and the golden
anklets upon His lotus feet rang.

vipra-sädhvé-mukhämbhoja-ghana-dhvani-ninädite
nandayaty ati-pupaugha-gandhonmädita-diì-mukhe 25
vipra-sädhvé - brähmaëa ladies; mukha-ambhoja - lotus mouths; ghana-dhvani loud sound; ninädite - resonant with; nandayati - delighted; ati-puñpa - many
flowers; augha - flood; gandha - fragrance; unmädita - intoxicating; dik-mukhe in all directions.
From the lotus mouths of saintly brähmaëés came a loud and resonant sound (ulu
ulu), which engladdened everyone present while a great shower of delightfully
fragrant flowers fluttered in all directions.

khe 'vasthite sura-gaëe / babhüva mahad-utsavaù
çré-këa-kértanänandaù / sarvva-çruti-manoharaù 26
khe - in outer space; avasthite - situated; sura-gaëe - the host of gods; babhüva was; mahat-utsavaù - great festival; çré-këa-kértana-änandaù - the joy of Kåñëa
kértana; sarva-çruti - all the Vedas; mana-haraù - attractive to the mind.
Amongst the host of suras situated above them in outer space, a great festival of Çré-

[p.203]
Kåñëa-kértana also took place, which is the most attractive spiritual practice to be
found in all the Vedic literature.

ye 'neka-janma-kta-puëya-samudra-saìkhyäs / te këa-deva-samam
eva nitänta-çäntäù
ntyanti hara-pulakäçrubhir ävtäìgä / devä yathäcala-bhidä sukhino
diviöhäù 27
ye - who; aneka-janma - many births; kta-puëya - performed pious deeds;
samudra - ocean; saìkhyäù - counted; te - they; këa-deva-samam - equality with
Lord Kåñëa; eva - certainly; nitänta-çäntäù - unfathomably peaceful; ntyanti dance; hara-pulaka - hairs erect, thrilled by rapture; açrubhiù - by the tears; ävta covered; aìgäù - bodies; deväù - gods; yathä - like; acala-bhidä - Indra, the
breaker of mountains; sukhinaù - happy; divi-sthäù - situated in heaven.
While the demigods in heaven headed by Indra-deva, smasher of mountains felt
bliss, so also did Gaura's bhaktas. They who throughout many births had
accumulated pious deeds as numerous as the waves of the ocean now found
themselves dancing in the company of Çré Kåñëa Himself. Thus they felt
unfathomable peace. As they danced, their bodies became covered by tears and
pulakas.

Thus ends the Third Sarga entitled "Çré Caitanya Disperses the Thunderclouds," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fourth Sarga
dyu-nadé-majjanam
Bathing in the Sky-River

[p.204]
tatra çuklämbaro näma / dvijo roditi nityaçäù
patitvä daëòavad bhümau / vadann eva muhu muhuù 1
tatra - then; çuklämbara; näma - named; dvijaù - brähmaëa; roditi - wept;
nityaçäù - always; patitvä - having fallen; daëòa-vat - like a rod; bhümau - on the
earth; vadan - saying; evam - thus; muhuù muhuù - repeatedly.
From that time on, the brähmaëa named Çuklämbara would weep constantly,
falling repeatedly to the earth like a rod, he proclaimed again and again:

navadvépas tu madhuräktas täta tvayädhunä
iti savilapan bhümau / roditi prema-vihvalaù 2
navadvépaù - the town of nine islands; tu - now; madhura - sweet, the birthplace of Kåñëa; kta - made; täta - dear one; tvayä - by You; adhunä - now; iti thus; savilapan - uttered; bhümau - on the earth; roditi - he wept; prema-vihvalaù
- overwhelmed by love.
"Dear Lord, now You have transformed Navadvépa into Mathurä!" So saying, he
wept and rolled about on the earth, immersed in loving sentiments.

vayasyäse vinikipta-karo ntyati karhicit
kvacid romäïcita-tanuù / kalpate paramaù pumän 3
vayasya - associate; ase - on the shoulder; vinikipta - placed; karaù - hand;
ntyati - He dances; karhicit - sometimes; kvacit - sometimes; roma-aïcita - hairs
bristling; tanuù - body; kalpate - it happened; paramaù puman - the supreme
Soul of the universe.
At times the Supreme Soul would dance, placing His hand on the shoulder of an
associate; at times the hairs of His body would thrill out of rapture.

[p.205]
kvacid éçvara-bhävena / bhtyebhyaù pradadau varän
eva nänä-vidhäkärair / ntyan lokän äçikayat 4
kvacit - sometimes; éçvara-bhävena - in the mood of the Supreme Controller;
bhtyebhyaù - to His servants; pradadau - He bestowed; varän - boons; evam thus; nänä-vidhä - many kinds; äkäraiù - with forms; ntyan - dancing; lokän - the
people; äçikayat - He taught.
Sometimes in the mood of the Supreme Controller, He awarded boons to His
servitors, and sometimes, while dancing, He taught the people the moods of bhava
by many kinds of expressive gestures.

kadäcit sva-jana-skandham / äruhya harayan prabhuù
sva-janän kréòati prétaù / kaëa-däyä kta-kaëaù 5
kadäcit - once; sva-jana - own men; skandham - shoulders; äruhya - mounting;
harayan - enlivening; prabhuù - the Master; sva-janän - His own men; kréòati He plays; prétaù - satisfied; kaëa-däyäm - at night; kta-kaëaù - having leisure.
Once, while Prabhu was passing leisure moments at night, He enlivened the hearts
of His associates by mounting upon their shoulders and sporting in a pleasurable
mood.

athäpara-dine bhümäv / upaviçyänunädayan
karatälair diçäh proce / paçya çailüa-ceöitam 6
atha - then; apara-dine - on another day; bhümau - on the earth; upaviçya sitting; anunädayan - reverberating; kara-tälaiù - by clapping the palms of His
hands; diçäh - directions; proce - He declared; paçya - see; çailüa - of the actor;
ceöitam - activity.
On another day, while sitting on the ground, He clapped the palms of His hands,
making sounds which reverberated in all directions, and called out, "Oh! Just
behold the activities of the actor!

[p.206]
paçya paçyädbhuta béja / bhümau saropita mayä
paçya paçyäìkuro jäto / nimieëa taruù punaù 7
paçya paçya - see, see!; adbhutam - wonderful; béjam - seed; bhümau - on the
earth; saropitam - planted; mayä - by Me; paçya paçya - see, see!; aìkuraù sprout; jäta - born; nimieëa - in a moment; taruù - a tree; punaù - again.
"Behold, behold the wonderful seed which I have planted in the earth! Look, look
at this sprout which has germinated and become a tree within a moment!

jäta paçyäsya pupaugha / paçya paçya phala punaù
jäta paçya phala pakva / tasya saìgrahaëa punaù 8
jätam - born; paçya - see!; asya - of it; pupa - flowers; augham - a multitude;
paçya paçya - see, see!; phalam - fruit; punaù - further; jätam - born; paçya - see!;
phalam - fruit; pakvam - ripe; tasya - of it; saìgrahaëam - picking; punaù further.
"Look now! Thousands of flowers are blossoming! Look, look at the fruits that are
forming! And now look how the fruits are ripe and ready to pick!

phala vrko pi nästy eva / kaëän mäyä-kta yataù
präntare tu kta hy eva / na kéïcid api labhyate 9
phalam - fruit; vrkaù - the tree; api - also; na asti - there is not; eva - indeed;
kaëät - in a moment; mäyä-ktam - made by the illusory potency; yataù - from;
präntare - in the desert; tu - indeed; ktam - made; hi - surely; evam - thus; na
kéïcit - nothing; api - assuredly; labhyate - obtained.
"Certainly neither these fruits nor the tree, which have been created within a
moment by My illusory energy, have any reality. They are like the mirage in the
desert, from which there is nothing to be obtained.

[p.207]
éçvarasyägrataù ktvä / dhana vipulam açnute
eva mäyä-kta karma / sarvva cedam anarthakam 10
éçvarasya - of the Supreme Lord; agrataù - in the presence of; ktvä - done;
dhanam - wealth; vipulam - profuse; açnute - one obtains; evam - thus; mäyäktam - created by illusion; karma - action; sarvam - all; ca - and; idam - this;
anarthakam - insubstantial.
"In this way, all work performed under the guidance of the illusory potency is
insubstantial, but one performing service under the Lord's guidance receives the
immense wealth of prema.

éçvarärtha kta hy etat / sarvva särthakatäm éyät
tasmäd éçvara-sevärtha / sarvva karmäcaret su-dhéù 11
éçvara - the Supreme Lord; artham - the purpose; ktam - done; hi - surely; etat this; sarvam - all; sa-arthakatäm - beneficial; éyät - attains; tasmät - therefore;
éçvara - of the Supreme Lord; sevä-artham - the purpose of service; sarvam - all;
karma - action; äcaret - one should do; su-dhéù - a man of fine intelligence.
"All that which is done for the sake of I~çvara brings actual benefit. Therefore a
man of refined intelligence should perform all his work for the Lord's satisfaction."

tataù proväca bhagavän / mukundämbaöham agrataù
sthita prekya tvayä ki nu / brahma-vidyä nijocyate 12
tataù - then; proväca - spoke; bhagavän - all-opulent Lord; mukunda;
ambaöham - physician; agrataù - in the presence of; sthitam - situated; prekya looking on; tvayä - by you; kim nu - whether indeed?; brahma-vidyä knowledge of spirit; nija - own; ucyate - it is said.
Then the all-opulent Lord spoke to the physician Mukunda, who was standing in

[p.208]
His presence, "Do you not have any personal realization of spiritual life as taught in
the Vedas?"

ity uktvä sa papäöheda / çloka svayam arindamaù
çré-räma-näma-mähätmya / güòha-vedärtha-saìgraham 13
iti - thus; uktvä - speaking; saù - He; papäöha - recited; idam - this; çlokam verse; svayam - spontaneously; arindamaù - the subduer of the foe; çré-rämanäma - of the glorious name of Räma; mähätmyam - the glories; güòha confidential; veda-artha - meaning of the Vedas; saìgraham - summary.
After saying this, the Lord, subduer of the foe, recited the following verse which
establishes the glory of the illustrious name of Räma. This verse is a confidential
summary of Vedic truth:

ramante yogino 'nante / satyänanda-cid-ätmani
iti räma-padenäsau / para brahmäbhidhéyate 14
ramante - they enjoy; yoginaù - those connected with the Supreme Lord;
anante - in the unlimited; satya - truth; änanda - bliss; cit - cognizance; ätmani in the Supreme Personality; iti - thus; räma-padena - by the term "Räma"; asau He; param - Supreme; brahma - Spirit; abhidhéyate - is called.
"Persons who are connected through yoga with the Personality of Godhead derive
pleasure only in the Lord, whose unlimited form is composed of eternity,
cognizance and bliss. For this reason, the Supreme Brahman is described by the
term `Räma,' meaning the reservoir of pleasure."

punaù prokta bhagavatä / ta vaidyam anuçäsatä
catur-bhujasya yad dhyäna / tad vara parikértitam 15
dvi-bhujasya tu yad dhyänam / tan nyünam iti te matam
parameçvara-bhedena / kevala duùkham eva hi 16

[p.209]
punaù - again; proktam - spoken; bhagavatä - by the Lord; tam - him; vaidyam the physician; anuçäsatä - by chastising; catu-bhujasya - of the four-armed form;
yat - which; dhyänam - meditation; tat - that; varam - best; parikértitam declared; dvi-bhujasya - of the two-armed form; tu - but; yat - which; dhyänam meditation; tat - that; nyünam - inferior; iti - thus; te - your; matam - considered;
parama-éçvara - between the forms of the Supreme Lord; bhedena - by
differentiating; kevalam - only; duùkham - grief; eva - surely; hi - indeed.
Again the Lord spoke, chastising the physician Mukunda, "You have declared that
meditation on the four-armed form of the Lord is best, and you consider meditation
on His two-armed form inferior. By such differentiation between the forms of the
Supreme Lord, you can certainly attain only grief.

yady ätmano hita vetsi / tadä yatna-puraùsaram
dvi-bhuja-dhyänam eva tva / kuru sarvva-phala-pradam 17
yadi - if; ätmanaù - of the spirit-soul; hitam - welfare; vetsi - you understand;
tadä - then; yatna-puraùsaram - with endeavor; dvi-bhuja-dhyänam - meditation
on the two-armed form; eva - indeed; tvam - you; kuru - do; sarva-phala - all
benefits; pradam - bestowing.
"If you understand the actual welfare of the spirit-soul, then you should meditate
on the Lord's two-armed form with intense endeavor, and this will endow you with
all desired benefits."

proväca ta deva / mukundo namra-kandharaù
gauräìga-caraëämbhoja-madhupo gäyakottamaù 18
tataù - then; proväca - spoke; tam - to Him; devam - Lord; mukundaù - the
associate of Mahäprabhu; namra-kandharaù - with bowed head; gauräìgacaraëa - the feet of Gauräìga; ambho-ja - lotus; madhu-paù - bee; gäyakauttamaù - best of singers.

[p.210]
Then Mukunda, that best among singers, who was like a bee tasting the honey at
the lotus feet of Gauräìga, replied to the Lord with his head bowed submissively:
snäta mayä sura-nadé-payasi prakäma / çré-vaiëaväìghri-rajasäìgam alaìkta ca
tvat-päda-padma-vara-chatram amu mayädya / mürdhni prayaccha kuru däsya-pade
'bhiekam 19

snätam - bathed; mayä - by me; sura-nadé - the river of saints; payasi - in the
water; prakämam - to my satisfaction; çré-vaiëava - the blessed vaiñëavas; aìghri foot; rajasa - dust; aìgam - body; alaìktam - decorated; ca - and; tvat-pädapadma - Your lotus feet; vara-chatram - beautiful umbrella; amum - this; mayä by me; adya - today; mürdhni - on the head; prayaccha - bestow; kuru - make;
däsya-pade - in the position of servitude; abhiekam - holy bath.
"I have bathed to my heart's content in the waters of the sura-nadé, and my body is
decorated with the dust from the feet of the blessed vaiñëavas. Now today kindly
bestow the beautiful umbrella of Your lotus feet on my head, and by performing an
abhiçeka with Your foot-dust, please initiate me as Your servant."

eva niçamya tad-väkya / tasya mürdhni padämbujam
dattavän bhagaväs tuöaù / sa-haro 'bhüt tadaiva saù 20
evam - thus; niçamya - hearing; tat-väkyam - those words; tasya - his; mürdhni on his head; pada-ambujam - lotus foot; dattavän - awarded; bhagavän - the
Lord; tuöaù - pleased; sa-haraù - with joy; abhüt - it was; tadä - then; eva - surely;
saù - he.
Upon hearing these words, the Lord became pleased and bestowed His lotus feet
on the head of Mukunda, who then became very jubilant.

romäïcita-tanur dhémän / açru-pürëa-vilocanaù
tato muräri proväca / bhagavän ambujekaëaù 21
roma - hairs; aïcita - expanded; tanuù - body; dhémän - intelligent man; açru-

[p.211]
pürëa - filled with tears; vilocanaù - eyes; tataù - then; murärim; proväca - He
said; bhagavän; ambu-ja - water-born (lotus); ikaëaù - eyes.
The body of that intelligent man became covered by ecstatic pulakas and his eyes
filled with tears. The lotus-eyed Lord then addressed Muräri:

katha tva ktavän vaidya / gétam adhyätma-tat-param
jévite yadi väïchästi / premni vä te hareù sphä 22
tadä géta parityajya / kuru çloka hareù svayam
tac chrutvä präha ta deva / vinayena bhiñak su-dhéù 23
çréman-näräyaëo näma / guptaù snehärëava gurum
yathä tavävatäro 'yam / vaktum arhati sämpratam 24
katham - how?; tvam - you; ktavän - done; vaidya - O physician; gétam Bhagavad Gétä; adhyätma - the transcendent spirit; tat-param - the supreme
truth; jévite - in living; yadi - if; väïchä - desire; asti - there is; premni - in love;
vä - or; te - your; hareù - of Hari; sphä - desire; tadä - then; gétam - Bhagavad
Gétä; parityajya - putting aside; kuru - make; çlokam - verse; hareù - of Hari;
svayam - spontaneously; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; präha - he said; tat - that;
devam - Lord; vinayena - with modesty; bhiñak - physician; su-dhéù - intelligent;
çrémat-näräyaëaù - the beautiful refuge for all humanity; näma - indeed; guptaù confidential; sneha-arëavam - ocean of affection; gurum - great; yathä - as; tava Your; avatäraù - descent; ayam - this; vaktum - to say; arhati - You ought;
sämpratam - now.
"O physician, is your realization of the supreme truths of the Gétä concerning the
transcendent spirit-soul and Supersoul complete? Now, if you have a desire to truly
live, and if you have a desire to attain love for Hari, then completely putting aside
the Gétä, just compose a verse from your heart about Hari." Hearing this, the
intelligent physician Muräri Gupta modestly replied to the Lord, who had appeared
as a guru and whose affection is like an ocean: "Because Näräyana is indeed Your
confidential avatära, it is only fitting that You Yourself should speak about Him.

[p.212]
tathäjïä kuru deveça / tat çrutvä sa-smitänanaù
präha ta bhagavän asya / tathaiva sambhaviyati 25
tathä - as; äjïäm - order; kuru - fulfill; deva-éça - Lord of the demigods; tat that; çrutvä - hearing; sa-smita-änanaù - with a smiling face; präha - He said; tam
- to him; bhagavän - the Lord; asya - of this; tathä eva - so indeed; sambhaviyati it shall be.
"Kindly fulfill this command, O Lord of gods." The Lord heard this with a smiling
face and replied to him, "Certainly this must happen.

yad vadiyaty asau vaidyas / tat su-satya bhaviyati
etat çrutvä harer väkya / noce kiïcid bhayät tu saù 26
yat - what; vadiyati - he shall say; asau - this; vaidyaù - the physician; tat - that;
su-satyam - filled with truth; bhaviyati - it shall be; etat - this; çrutvä - hearing;
hareù - of Hari; väkyam - words; na - not; uce - speaks; kiïcit - anything; bhayät out of fear; tu - but; saù - he.
"Whatever this physician may speak is the essence of truth and must come to
pass." Hearing these words of Hari, Muräri said nothing out of fear. Yet his heart
rejoiced at that incident.

murärir mumude tatra / çrémat-çréväsa-paëòitaù
çuddha-sväcära-nirato / hari-sevä-paräyaëaù 27
muräriù - Muräri Gupta; mumude - took pleasure; tatra - in that; çrémat-çréväsapaëòitaù - the pure devotee; çuddha-su-äcära - pure behavior; nirataù - attached
to; hari-sevä - the service of Çré Hari; paräyaëaù - dedicated.
Çréman Çréväsa Paëita was attached to pure behavior and dedicated to the service
of Çré Hari.

[p.213]
prätaù snätvä hareù püjä / ktvä samyag vidhänataù
upäsanä tasya nitya / karoti bhrätbhiù saha 28
prätaù - early; snätvä - having bathed; hareù - of Hari; püjäm - worship; ktvä having done; samyak - complete; vidhänataù - according to precept; upäsanäm waiting on; tasya - His; nityam - always; karoti - he performs; bhrätbhiù - with
his brothers; saha - together.
After bathing early and performing complete worship of Çré Hari according to the
guidance of scripture, Çréväsa and his brothers would constantly wait upon the
Lord.

särdha gäyan harer näma / gétäni ca mudänvitaù
snäpayas ta çubhair apbhir / arpayan dravyam uttamam 29
bhojayan phala-gavyena / höätmä dvija-puìgavaù
tasyänujaù çriyä yukto / rämaù sa bhrät-vatsalaù 30
särdham - together; gäyan - singing; hareù - of Hari; näma - the names; gétäni songs; ca - and; mudä-anvitaù - with joy; snäpayan - bathing; tam - Him; çubhaiù with auspicious; apbhiù - with waters; arpayan - offering; dravyam paraphernalia; uttamam - excellent; bhojayan - feeding; phala-gavyena - with
fruits and the products of the cow; höa-ätmä - joyous soul; dvija-puìgavaù eminent brähmaëa; tasya - his; anu-jaù - younger brother; çriyä - with opulence;
yuktaù - endowed; rämaù - brother; saù - he; bhrät-vatsalaù - affectionate to His
brothers.
Together they jubilantly sang the names of Hari and songs of devotion as they
bathed Him with sanctified waters, made offerings of excellent paraphernalia, and
fed Him with foods made from fruits and the products of the cow. The younger
brother of Çréväsa named Räma was endowed with opulence and was affectionate to
his brothers.

[p.214]
priyaç ca sarvva-bhütänä / jyeöha-sevä-paräyaëaù
hari-sevä saha bhrätä / karoty anudina su-dhéù 31
priyaù - dear; ca - and; sarva-bhütänäm - for all living beings; jyeöha-sevä - to
the service to the senior; paräyaëaù - dedicated; hari-seväm - service to Hari;
saha - with; bhrätä - with His brother; karoti - does; anudinam - day after day; sudhéù - very wise.
He was dear to all living beings and dedicated to the service of his elders. Together
with his brother, that thoughtful person rendered sevä day after day to Çré Hari.

çréväsa-rämau nå-hareù sadä priyau / täbhyä saha kréòati cakrapäëiù
väöyä tayor eva nanarta devo / yathari-saìghe kapilo mahätmä 32
çréväsa-rämau nå-hareù sadä priyau / täbhyä saha kréòati cakrapäëiù väöyä tayor eva nanarta devo / yathari-saìghe kapilo
mahätmä 32
çréväsa-rämau - Çréväsa and Çréräma; nå-hareù - of Hari in a human-like form;
sadä - always; priyau - dear; täbhyäm - with them; saha - with; kréòati - He
sports; cakra-päëiù - He who wields the Sudarçana disc; väöyäm - in their home;
tayoù - amongst those two; eva - surely; nanarta - danced; devaù - the Lord;
yathä - like; i-saìghe - in the company of sages; kapilaù - the Lord as the teacher
of the Sänkhya-yoga system; mahä-ätmä - great soul.
Those two brothers, Çréväsa and Çréräma, were always dear to Nåhari. As the
wielder of the Sudarçana disc danced with them in their home, He appeared like the
great soul Kapila Muni accompanied by sages.

anyedyur adhyäpayad aprameyaù / çiyän vadet ta dvija-sünur ekaù

[p.215]
çré-këa-nämä khalu mäyayä syäd / ittha samäkarëya vacaù
khalasya 33
karëau karäbhyä vinidhäya devaù / çiyair upeto dyu-nadé jagäma
snätvä sa-celaù saha çiya-vargair / upägamat keli-nidhi gha svam
34
anye dyuù - on another day; adhyäpayat - He taught; aprameyaù - the
immeasurable Lord; çiyän - students; vadet - he would say; tam - Him; dvijasünuù - the son of a brähmaëa; ekaù - one; çré-këa-nämä - the name of Çré Kåñëa;
khalu - indeed; mäyayä - by the illusory energy; syät - it may be; ittham - thus;
samäkarëya - hearing; vacaù - the words; khalasya - of the wicked man; karëau the ears; karäbhyäm - by the hands; vinidhäya - placed; devaù - the Lord; çiyaiù with His students; upetaù - accompanied by; dyu-nadém - the river that flows
through the heavens; jagäma - went; snätvä - having bathed; sa-celaù - with His
cloth; saha-çiya-vargaiù - with the assembly of students; upägamat - went; kelinidhim - ocean of playfulness; gham - home; svam - His own.
On another day as the limitless Lord instructed His students, one of them, the son
of a brähmaëa, said that the Kåñëa's name was a product of mäyä Hearing that
malicious person's words, covering His ears the golden lord went to the Gaìgä and
plunged in with His clothes together with all His students. Then He returned to His
home, which was like an ocean of His pleasure-pastimes.

paöhed ya ittha dyu-nadé-nimajjana / harer labhet so 'pi kratoù
phala naraù
harau ca bhakti vimalä smti ca / präpnoti çëvann api tat-phala
naraù 35
paöhet - may read; yaù - who; ittham - thus; dyu-nadé-nimajjanam - bathing in
the sky-born river; hareù - of Hari; labhet - can obtain; saù - he; api - indeed;
kratoù - of sacrifice; phalam - fruit; naraù - the man; harau - of Hari; ca - and;
bhaktim - devotion; vi-maläm - without impurity; smtim - remembrance; ca -

[p.216]
and; präpnoti - obtains; çëvan - hearing; api - that very; tat-phalam - the fruit of
hearing; naraù - the man.
The person who reads this narration of Gaura Hari's bathing in the sky-born river
can verily obtain the fruits of sacrifice, as well as unalloyed devotion to and constant
remembrance of Çré Hari. Indeed, simply by hearing it one obtains that same benefit.

Thus ends the Fourth Sarga entitled "Bathing in the Sky-River," in the Second
Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifth Sarga
bhäva-kathanam
Tales of the Lord's Ecstatic Activities

tato jagäma püryyä sa / çréväsädibhir anvitaù
advaitäcäryya-varyyasya / bhaktasya darçanotsukaù 1
tataù - then; jagäma - He went; püryäm - in the town; saù - He; çréväsa; ädibhiù
- headed by; anvitaù - together with; advaita-äcärya - the incarnation of a
devotee; varyasya - of the exalted; bhaktasya - of the devotee; darçana-utsukaù eager for the vision.
Then, eagerly desiring to see the great Advaitäcärya, Gaura Hari went to Advaita's
residence in Çäntipura, accompanied by His devotees led by Çréväsa.

gacchan pathi muhur gäyan / harer géta mudänvitaù
kvacit ntyati ntyadbhiù / sva-janaiù saha sa prabhuù 2

[p.217]
gacchan - going; pathi - on the path; muhuù - again; gäyan - singing; hareù - of
Hari; gétam - song; mudä-anvitaù - filled with happiness; kvacit - sometimes;
ntyati - he dances; ntyadbhiù - with dancers; sva-janaiù - with His own men;
saha - together; saù - He; prabhuù - the Master.
While travelling on the path, Mahäprabhu would sing songs describing the
qualities and pastimes of Çré Hari, repeating them again and again in great
jubilation, and sometimes He would dance amongst His associates.

tato gatvä papätorvvyäm / äcäryyasya samépataù
daëòavat vaiëava viëu / mänyamäno 'nuçikayan 3
tataù - then; gatvä - having arrived; papäta - He fell; urvyäm - on the earth;
äcäryasya - of the teacher; samépataù - nearby; daëòa-vat - like a rod; vaiëavam the devotee of Viñëu; viëum - God; mänyamänaù - honoring; anuçikayan teaching.
When Gaura arrived in the presence of the _cärya, He fell like a rod to the earth,
thus teaching His followers that the vaiñëava is to be honored as Viñëu.

ta dövä sahasotthäyäcäryyas tu tat-samépataù
gatvä papäta bhümau sa / sambhrameëa jagad-guruù 4
tam - Him; dövä - seeing; sahasä - suddenly; utthäya - rising; äcäryaù; tu indeed; tat-samépataù - near Him; gatvä - going; papäta - He fell; bhümau - on
the earth; saù - he; sambhrameëa - with great reverence; jagat-guruù - spiritual
preceptor of the cosmic manifestation.
When the _cärya saw Gaura, at once that guru of the all the worlds stood up.
Approaching Him with great respect, he fell before Him on the ground.

anyonyäliìgana ktvä / premotkaëöhau babhüvatuù
kampäçru-pulakädyais tu / paripürëau su-vigrahau 5

[p.218]
anyonya - mutually; äliìganam - embracing; ktvä - did; prema - love; utkaëöhau
- longing for; babhüvatuù - They were; kampa - trembling; açru - tears; pulaka thrilling of the hairs; ädyaiù - headed by; tu - indeed; paripürëau - fully
complete; su-vigrahau - sublime forms.
They lovingly embraced one another, satisfying Their long-cherished desires, and
by that contact Their sublime forms became full of the symptoms of transcendental
ecstasy such as trembling, tears, thrilling of the hairs, and so forth.

upaviçya tato devaù / kathä cakre hareù priyäm
manoharä päpa-harä / mukti-prema-phala-pradäm 6
upaviçya - sitting; tataù - then; devaù - the Lord; kathäm - story; cakre - made;
hareù - of Hari; priyäm - dear; manoharäm - mind-enchanting; päpa-haräm - sindispelling; mukti-prema - liberation and love; phala - fruits; pradäm - bestowing.
Accepting a seat, Gaura then narrated a story which endeared the heart, enchanted
the mind, dispelled all sin and bestowed the fruits of liberation and love for Kåñëa.

tato 'dvaito 'bravéd väkya / bhaktir nästi kalau kitau
iti müòhä vadanti ye / te paçyantv adya cakuä 7
tataù - then; advaitaù - the incarnation of a devotee; abravét - said; väkyam statement; bhaktiù - devotion; na asti - there is not; kalau - in the age of Kali;
kitau - on earth; iti - thus; müòhäù - fools; vadanti - they say; ye - who; te - they;
paçyantu - they should see; adya - presently; cakuä - with the eye.
Advaita commented, "Fools say that in this age of Kali bhakti exists no longer.
They should behold this scene of devotion manifest today in Çäntipura."

tat çrutvä bhagavän äha / kiïcit prasphüritädharaù
bhaktiç cen nästi n-hareù / ki tadästi kitäv iha 8

[p.219]
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; äha - said; kiïcit somewhat; prasphürita - trembling; adharaù - lips; bhaktiù - devotion; cet - if; na
asti - there is not; n-hareù; kim - what?; tadä - then; asti - is there; kitau - on the
earth; iha - in this time.
Hearing this, Çré Bhagavän's lips quivered slightly as He replied, "If there is no
devotion to Nåhari, then what has any value on the earth?

bhaktir evästi sasäre / sarvva-särä sukhävahä
sä nästéti ca yo brüte / janma tasya nirarthakam 9
bhaktiù - devotion; eva - surely; asti - there is; sasäre - in the material world;
sarva-särä - essence of everything; sukha-ävahä - bringing happiness; sä - she;
na asti - there is not; iti - thus; ca - and; yaù - who; brüte - says; janma - birth;
tasya - his; nirarthakam - without value.
"In this wheel of birth and death, bhakti assuredly exists as the vital essential
factor which brings whatever joy a person feels in any activity. He who asserts that
bhakti has no reality in this age has gained no benefit although he has received this
valuable human birth.

tasmät këe bhaktir äste / su-prasannä sanätané
yasya syät karma-bandhaç ca / naçyet premä harau bhavet 10
tasmät - therefore; këe - unto Kåñëa; bhaktiù - devotion; äste - remains; suprasannä - very happy; sanätané - eternal; yasya - whose; syät - it may be; karmabandhaù - bondage to fruitive activity; ca - and; naçyet - can be destroyed; premä
- love; harau - unto Hari; bhavet - it may be.
"Thus whoever has devotion for Kåñëa evokes the pleasure of Bhakti Devé, who is
the eternal goddess of devotion. The knots binding him to material existence are
cut, and within his heart Hari-prema awakens."

[p.220]
tato 'vadat çréniväso / dövä kaïcid avaiëavam
dvija prasphuöam evägre / hareù sasadi duùkhitaù 11
tataù - then; avadat - he said; çréniväsaù - the pure devotee; dövä - seeing;
kaïcit - some; avaiëavam - a non-vaiñëava; dvijam - brähmaëa; prasphuöam clearly; eva - certainly; agre - before; hareù - of Hari; sasadi - in the assembly;
duùkhitaù - unhappy.
Then Çréniväsa apprehensively remarked to the Lord, "I have noticed a brähmaëa
standing in the forefront of the assembly of Çré Hari who is clearly not a vaiñëava.

vighna këotsave karttu / dvijo 'ya samupägataù
tac chrutvä bhagavän präha / näyam aträgamiyati 12
vighnam - hindrance; këa-utsave - in the festival of Kåñëa consciousness;
kartum - to make; dvijaù - brähmaëa; ayam - this; samupägataù - come; yat which; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; präha - said; na - not; ayam - this;
atra - here; ägamiyati - he shall come.
"This brähmaëa has come to cause some hindrance to our festival of Kåñëa
consciousness." Hearing this, the Lord replied, "This person will not come here.

nästy atra tava viprendra / cintä käcit sukhé bhava
näyäta tatra vipro 'sau / viëu-mäyä-vimohitaù 13
na - not; asti - there is; atra - here; tava - your; vipra-indra - best of vipras;
cintä - anxiety; käcit - any; sukhé - happy; bhava - be; na - not; äyäta - come;
tatra - there; vipraù - learned brähmaëa; asau - this; viëu-mäyä - by the energy
of Viñëu; vimohitaù - illusioned.
"O best of vipras, there is no reason for any anxiety on this account. Be happy!
This vipra illusioned by Viñëu-mäyä has not approached this place."

[p.221]
svaya çänti-pura gatvä / dövädvaita-maheçvaram
aiçvaryya kathayan këa-pürëäveço babhüva ha 14
svayam - spontaneously; çänti-puram - the residence of Advaita _cärya; gatvä went; dövä - having seen; advaita; maheçvaram - the incarnation of Çiva;
aiçvaryam - opulence; kathayan - speaking; këa; pürëa-äveçaù - totally absorbed;
babhüva - He became; ha - indeed.
Having left for Çäntipura and seen Çré Advaita, who is the incarnation of Lord Çiva,
Gauräìga became wholly immersed in Çré Kåñëa while discussing His opulences.

tataù kréòä-paro bhütvä / çréväsasyäsa-deçake
dattvä savye savya-bähu / väma prädat gadädhare 15
tataù - then; kréòä - play; paraù - absorbed; bhütvä - became; çréväsasya - of
Çréväsa; asa-deçake - on the shoulder; dattvä - placed; savye - on the left; savyabähum - left arm; vämam - right; prädat - placed; gadädhare - on Gadädhara.
Then the Lord Gauräìga became absorbed in a playful mood and placed His left
arm on the shoulder of Çréväsa and His right on Gadädhara.

çré-räma-paëòitasyäìke / dattvä pädämbuja hariù
taiù särddha mumude çrémad-advaitäcäryya-sannidhau 16
çré-räma-paëòitasya - of the Paëita, Çré Räma; aìke - in the lap; dattvä - placed;
päda-ambujam - lotus feet; hariù; taiù - with them; särdham - together; mumude He took pleasure; çrémat-advaita-äcärya; sannidhau - in the presence of.
He next placed His lotus feet in the lap of Çré Räma Paëita and thus enjoyed with
them in Çrémad Advaitäcärya's presence.

tatra bhuktvä varänna sa / candanenänulepya ca
gäträëi harayan loka / jagau këa nanartta ca 17

[p.222]
tatra - there; bhuktvä - ate; vara-annam - excellent foods; saù - He; candanena with the pulp of sandal; anulepya - being anointed; ca - and; gäträëi - limbs;
harayan - giving pleasure; lokam - the people; jagau - He sang; këam - the name
of Kåñëa; nanarta - danced; ca - and.
Thereafter He ate excellent foods, and the devotees anointed His limbs with
sandalwood-pulp. Then the son of Çacé enlivened all the people as He sang the
names of Kåñëa and danced.

äcäryo bubudhe pürëam / ätmänam äçiä budhaù
dövä çré-gaura-candrasya / premänanda-mahotsavam 18
äcäryaù - Çré Advaita; bubudhe - realized; pürëam - complete; ätmänam - Self;
äçiä - by benediction; budhaù - the intelligent; dövä - seeing; çré-gaura-candrasya of Gaura Candra; prema-änanda - joy of Kåñëa love; mahä-utsavam - great
festival.
The enlightened _cärya deemed His entire being fulfilled as he watched Çré Gaura
Candr's agreat festival of premänanda.

äcäryeëa sama këaù / kértayan sa jagad-guruù
kréòitvä devavat tatra / punar ägän nijälayam 19
äcäryeëa - with the teacher; samam - together; këaù - the all-attractive;
kértayan - reciting; saù - He; jagat-guruù - guru of the cosmos; kréòitvä - having
sported; deva-vat - divinely; tatra - there; punaù - again; ägät - He came; nijaalayam - to His own place.
Then accompanied by the _cärya, the guru of the worlds, returned home while
divinely playing and describing Kåñëa's näma, guëa and lélä in song.

tataù so 'dhyätma-tattvärtha / vaktum ärebha éçvaraù

[p.223]
eka eva hariù svämé / vyaöi-rüpatayä sthitaù 20
tataù - then; saù - He; adhyätma-tattva-artham - the truth of the soul and
Supersoul; vaktum - to speak; ärebhe - He began; éçvaraù - the Supreme Lord;
ekaù - one; eva - surely; hariù - the dispeller of evil; svämé - Master; vyaöirüpatayä - with an unique individuality, form and attributes; sthitaù - existing.
He began to speak on the truths of the soul and the Supersoul thus, "There is
surely only one Master, Çré Hari. He exists with a unique personality composed of
form and attributes.

sahtaù svayam evaikas / tiöhaty ätmä svaya prabhuù
sarvvasyäntar-bahiù säké / käraëänä ca käraëam 21
sahtaù - brought together; svayam - Himself; eva - certainly; ekaù - one; tiöhati stands; ätmä - Self; svayam - spontaneously; prabhuù - Master; sarvasya - of all;
anta-bahiù - within and without; säké - witness; käraëänäm - of causes; ca - and;
käraëam - cause.
"He has personally brought everything into being. That supreme master,
witnessing within and without, spontaneously exists as the causeless cause of all
causes."

iti hasta prasäryäçu / muöé-ktya svaya punaù
kara sa darçayäm äsa / ntyan iva sa éçvaraù 22
iti - thus; hastam - hand; prasärya - spreading; äçu - swiftly; muöé-ktya making a fist; svayam -Himself; punaù - again; karam - causer; darçayäm äsa - He
showed; ntyan - dancing; iva - like; saù- He; éçvaraù - Supreme Lord, MahäViñëu.
By first spreading open His hand and then making a fist, Gaura showed with
dancing gestures the way in which the creator, Mahä-Viñëu, generates the cosmic
manifestation and again winds it up.

[p.224]
punar üce vacas tattva / sattä-mätra-svarüpiëam
bhävo 'py anarthakas tatra / sad-rüpam avadhäryyatäm 23
punaù - again; üce - He spoke; vacaù - words; tattvam - truth; sattä-mätra pure existence; sva-rüpiëam - in the original form; bhävaù - the material
existence; api - although; anarthakaù - without meaning; tatra - there; sat-rüpam
- the form of truth; avadhäryatäm - it must be understood.
Again He spoke of the eternal nature of the Absolute Truth: "Although this
material existence is without meaning, one should comprehend the transcendental
spiritual nature which pervades it.

ekatra brahmaëo 'pi syäd / deva-mürtir na sarvathä
anyasya mürtir bhavati / vinä taj-jïäna-käraëät 24
ekatra - in one base; brahmaëaù - of spirit; api - also; syät - it may be; evam thus; mürtiù - liberation; na - not; sarvathä - in all ways; anyasya - of another;
mürtiù - liberation; bhavati - it becomes; vinä - without; tat - the Lord; jïänakäraëät - due to knowledge.
"The Supreme Spirit is one throughout the cosmos. Even the gods are not allpervasive as He is. Only in the absence of this knowledge of oneness there appears
to be various forms of mundane duality.

paçyäìgulé kara-sthe me / hy ekä tatra madhu-plutä
jihvayä tä liha-svädya / tad anyä püya-samplutä 25
tä dövä ghëayä cänya / draöu notsahate kaëam
nirbheda-brahma-jïänäd dhi / sarvvam eva su-lakaëam 26
paçya - just see; aìgulé - the two fingers; kara-sthe - situated on the hand; me My; hi - certainly; ekä - one; tatra - there; madhu-plutä - covered by honey;

[p.225]
jihvayä - by the tongue; täm - that; liha - being licked; svädya - relishable; tat that; anyä - other; püya-samplutä - covered by pus; täm - that finger; dövä seeing; ghëayä - with disgust; ca - and; anyam - the other; draöum - to see; na not; utsahate - one can tolerate; kaëam - a moment; nirbheda-brahma - nondifferentiated Brahman; jïänät - by knowledge; hi - certainly; sarvam - all; eva indeed; su-lakaëam - sublime symptoms.
"Behold these two fingers on My hand. This one, if covered by honey, is a fit
object of attraction for the tongue. This other finger, if covered by pus, arouses
disgust just by its sight. Indeed, one cannot bear to look at it for even a moment. But
by cultivating knowledge of the one transcendental existence free from external
designations, one comes to see that everything is filled with auspicious symptoms
(in other words, one in contact with external designations may mistake the soul to
be the very designations that are covering it).

evam eko 'pi bhagavän / anädiù puruo 'vyayaù
sämagré-rasato jévo / mukto bhavati nänyathä 27
evam - thus; ekaù - one; api - also; bhagavän - all-opulent Lord; anädiù beginningless; puruaù - person; avyayaù - imperishable; sämagré - completeness,
variegatedness; rasataù - by relishing, jéva - living being; muktaù - liberated;
bhavati - becomes; na - not; anyathä - another way.
"Thus there is one all-opulent Lord, who is a beginningless, imperishable person.
The spirit-soul who perceives the Lord's completeness and variegatedness becomes
liberated, and there is no other means for him to do so."

eva bahu-prakära sa / jïäna-yoga dayä-nidhiù
uktvä tu virarämäryya-hdaya-stha-padämbujaù 28
evam - thus; bahu-prakäram - many means; saù - He; jïäna-yogam - union with
Kåñëa through knowledge; dayä-nidhiù - the ocean of mercy; uktvä - having
spoken; tu - indeed; viraräma - stopped; äryya-hdaya - hearts of the noble souls;
stha - situated; pada-ambujaù - lotus feet.

[p.226]
Thus the ocean of mercy, who places His feet within the hearts of all noble
persons, ceased speaking after describing in many ways the process of union with
Kåñëa through knowledge.

çrävayitvä tato jïäna / jïäna-gamya jagat-patim
këa jïätvä tat-padäbja / smtvä pulakam udvahan 29
çrävayitvä - having caused to hear; tataù - thus; jïänam - knowledge; jïänagamyam - attainable by knowledge; jagat-patim - protector of the universe; këam
- the all-attractive Lord; jïätvä - knowing; tat-pada-abjam - His lotus feet; smtvä remembering; pulakam - thrilled hairs; udvahan - bore.
Knowing that Çré Kåñëa was comprehendable by knowledge, and that He is the
master of the universal manifestation, Gauräìga taught transcendental knowledge.
He remembered Kåñëa's lotus feet, which caused thrill bumps to cover His body.

bhaktir eva samutköä / këa-prema-prakäçiné
ity eväha sadotkaëöho / gadgada jagad-éçvaraù 30
bhaktiù - devotion; eva - certainly; samutköä - elevates; kåñëa-prema - love of
Kåñëa; prakäçiné - awakens; iti - thus; eva - certainly; äha - said; sadä - always;
utkaëöhaù - greatly longing; gadgadam - choked voice; jagat-éçvaraù - Lord of the
universe.
With great longing, His voice choked and faltered as the Jagadéçvara declared,
"Bhakti elevates and awakens the soul to love of Kåñëa."

premäçru-kaëöho bhagavän / ida vacanam abravét
druta-citto gadgada-väk / rodity ala hasaty api 31
ntyaty ala gäyati ca / mad-bhakto bhuvana-trayam
punäti päti satata / sarvväpadbhyo divä-niçam 32

[p.227]
prema-açru - tears of love; kaëöhaù - throat; bhagavän - Lord; idam - this;
vacanam - words; abravét - He said; druta-cittaù - melted heart; gadgada-väk faltering words; roditi - he weeps; alam hasati - he laughs; api - also; ntyati - he
dances; alam gäyati - he sings; ca - and; mat-bhaktaù - My devotee; bhuvanatrayam - the three worlds; punäti - purifies; päti - protects; satatam - always;
sarva-äpadbhyaù - from all calamities; divä-niçam - by day and night.
With His throat choked by tears of love, Bhagavän declared, "As My bhakta's heart
melts while weeping, laughing, dancing and singing, he purifies and protects the
three worlds from all danger throughout the day and night."

ity uktvä höa-manasä / nanarta sva-janaiù saha
çrémad-viçvambharo devo / nija-bhakti-prakäçakaù 33
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; höa-manasä - with a joyous heart; nanarta - He
danced; sva-janaiù - with His own men; saha - together; çrémat-viçvambharaù the maintainer of the universe; devaù - Lord; nija-bhakti - devotion to Himself;
prakäçakaù - the revealer.
So saying , Viçvambhara-deva, the revealer of the path of devotion to Himself, with
a joyous heart, danced and sang with His followers.

Thus ends the Fifth Sarga entitled "Tales of the Lord's Ecstatic Activities," in
the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Sixth Sarga
sasära-araëya-upama çré-advaita-mähätmyam
The Material World Compared to a Forest,

[p.228]
and the Glories of Çré Advaita

athäpara-dine taträdvaitäcäryo mahä-yaçäù
navadvépe samäyäto / draöu viçvambhareçvaram 1
atha - then; apara-dine - on the next day; tatra - there; advaita-äcäryaù; mahäyaçäù - of high renown; navadvépe - in Navadvépa; samäyätaù - came; draöum - to
see; viçvambhara; éçvaram - the Supreme Lord.
Then on the next day, the widely renowned personality Çri Advaita _cärya came to
Navadvépa to see Lord Viçvambhara.

snäna ktvärcayitveça / sa yävad gacchatéçvaraù
draöu tävat sa bhagavän / çréväsasyäçrame vasan 2
snänam - bath; ktvä - having done; arcayitvä - having worshipped; éçam - the
Lord; saù - he; yävat - so long; gacchati - he goes; éçvaraù - the Supreme Lord;
draöum - to see; tävat - that long; saù - he; bhagavän - the Lord; çréväsasya - of
Çréväsa; äçrame - in the spiritual shelter; vasan - residing.
After taking bath and performing worship of His Çälagräma-çélä, Çré Advaita went
to see Mahäprabhu. And as long as He was in Navadvépa, He resided in Çréväsa
häkura's äçrama

pupaika nyasya daëòägre / proväca sa-smitänanaù
gadä-püjä ktä hy eä / mayä duöasya çäsanam 3
kariyämy anayä nitya / mad-bhakta-dveiëaù sadä
bhakta eva sadä mahya / präëädhiko na saçayaù 4
pupa-ekam - one flower; nyasya - inserting; daëòa-agre - on the tip of the staff;
proväca - He declared; sa-smita-änanaù - with a smiling face; gadä-püjä worship of the club; ktä - performed; hi - certainly; eä - this; mayä - by Me;

[p.229]
duöasya - of the rogue; çäsanam - chastisement; kariyämi - I shall; anayä - with
this; nityam - always; mat-bhakta-dveiëaù - of he who is hateful to My devotee;
sadä - always; bhaktaù - devotee; eva - surely; sadä - always; mahyam - to Me;
präëa-adhikaù - more than My life; na - no; saçayaù - doubt.
Placing a flower on the end of His staff, the son of Çacé spoke with a smiling face,
"Thus I have performed worship of My club. With this club, I shall always chastise
the wicked who are hateful to my devotee. Without doubt, My devotee is more dear
to Me than My very life.

eko 'sti duöo mad-bhakta-dveiëa kuöa-rogiëam
ktvä ta punar eväha / paiçäca-narakäçrayam 5
ekaù - one; asti - there is; duöaù - the wicked; mat-bhakta - My devotee;
dveiëam - enemy; kuöa-rogiëam - a man stricken with leprosy; ktvä - having
done; tam - him; punaù - again; eva - surely; aham - I; paiçäca-naraka - infernal
hell; äçrayam - entrance.
"There is presently a man who is inimical to my devotees. I have already afflicted
him with leprosy, and in the future I shall force him to enter the hells where the
demonic stay.

kariyämy acira käla / satyam etan mayoditam
näçayiyämi tac chiyän / vidhäsye viò-bhujän aham 6
kariyämi - I shall do; aciram - before long; kälam - time; satyam - truly; etat this; mayä - by Me; uditam - spoken; näçayiyämi - I shall destroy; tat - that
person; çiyän - disciples; vidhäsye - I shall place; viò-bhujän - the stool-eaters;
aham - I.
"This I shall do before long. I am speaking the truth. I shall destroy that man and
his followers, turning them into swine who eat stool.

vana prayätum icchämi / tad atraiva mahad vanam
vyäghrasya sadçäù kecit / kecit pääëa-sannibhäù 7

[p.230]
vanam - forest; prayätum - to set forth; icchämi - I desire; tat - that; tatra there; eva - indeed; mahat - great; vanam - forest; vyäghrasya - of the tiger;
sadçäù - like; kecit - some; kecit - some; pääëa-sannibhäù - like stones.
"I desired to set forth for the forest, yet this very place is indeed like a great forest.
Some men resemble tigers while others are like stones.

vkäëä sannibhäù kecit / kecit tëa-nibhä naräù
paçünä sannibhäù kecit / teneda su-mahad vanam 8
vkäëäm - of the trees; sannibhäù - like; kecit - some; kecit - some; tëa-nibhäù like grasses; naräù - men; paçünäm - of animals; sannibhäù - like; kecit - some;
tena - by this; idam - this; su-mahat - very great; vanam - forest.
"Some men resemble trees, and others are like grasses. Some resemble animals. By
this analogy, the material world can be perceived to be a very great forest.

çré-këa-caraëämbhoja-madhu-päna-ratä hi ye
te mänujä samäkhyätäù / sarvva-jévopakäriëaù 9
çré-këa - the all-attractive; caraëa-ambhoja - lotus feet; madhu-päna - ratä attached; hi - certainly; ye - who; te - they; mänujä - men; samäkhyätäù renowned; sarva-jéva - all living entities; upakäriëaù - benefactors.
"But men who are attached to drinking the honey of Çré Kåñëa's lotus feet are to be
celebrated as the benefactors of all these kinds of living beings.

advaitäcäryya-varyo 'tra / samäyäta iti çrutam
katha näyäti yaträste / tatra gacchamahe vayam 10
advaitäcärya - the incarnation of a devotee; varya - the excellent devotee; atra here; samäyäta - arrived; iti - thus; çrutam - heard; katham - how?; na - not; äyäti

[p.231]
- he is coming; yatra - where; äste - he is staying; tatra - there; gacchamahe - we
are going; vayam - we.
"We have heard that the great devotee Advaita _cärya has arrived. But why hasn't
He come here? We should go to the place where He is staying."

etasmin samaye taträcäryya svayam upägata
upäyana samädäya / tat-päda-padma-sannidhau 11
etasmin - at this; samaye - time; tatra - there; äcärya - Çré Advaita; svayam Himself; upägata - arrived; upäyanam - presents; samädäya - giving; tat-pädapadma - the lotus feet of the Lord; sannidhau - near.
At that moment, the _cärya Himself arrived there and presented gifts at the lotus
feet of the Lord.

tad dattvä daëòavad bhümau / nipapäta tadä prabhuù
kare ghétvä ta präha / tvad-artho 'ham ihägataù 12
tat - that; dattvä - giving; daëòa-vat - like a stick; bhümau - on the ground;
nipapäta - throwing down; tadä - then; prabhuù - the Master; kare - in the hand;
ghétvä - taking; tam - Him; präha - declared; tvat-arthaù - for Your desire; aham I; iha - in this world; ägataù - came.
After presenting those gifts, He fell flat to the ground before Gaura Këa. Taking
Him by the hand, Prabhu said, "It is on account of Your desire that I have come to
this world."

ity uktvä harayitvä / tat khaöäyä samupäviçat
äjïayä tasya devasyädvaitäcäryo nanartta ha 13
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; harayitvä - exulted; tat - that; khaöäyäm - on a cot;
samupäviçat - sat down; äjïayä - by the order; tasya - His; devasya - of the Lord;
advaita-äcäryaù - the avatära of a devotee; nanarta - danced; ha - indeed.

[p.232]
After He had thus spoken and given great joy to Çré Advaita, Çré Gauräìga sat down
on a cot. Then by the order of the Lord, the _cärya began to dance.

tad dövä bhagavän prétas / ta präha tava bälakäù
ete mä prärthayanty eva / prema-bhakti su-durlabhäm 14
tat - that; dövä - seeing; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; prétaù - pleased; tam Him; präha - said; tava - Your; bälakäù - boys; ete - these; mäm - Me;
prärthayanti - will long for; eva - surely; prema-bhaktim - loving devotion; sudurlabhäm - very rare.
Seeing that dancing, the illustrious Lord felt pleased and said to Him, "Your sons
are praying to Me for the most rare gift of prema-bhakti.

däsyämi tvat-kte vatsa / tat çrutvä hara-samplutaù
äcäryyaù präha bhagavan / ete te caraëänugäù
käruëyälaya-vätsalyät / tava ki syät su-durlabham 15
däsyämi - I shall give; tvat-kte - for Your sake; vatsa - O dear one; tat - that;
çrutvä - hearing; hara-samplutaù - immersed in joy; äcäryaù; präha - declared;
bhagavan - O blessed Lord; ete - these; te - Your; caraëa-anugäù - followers of
the feet; käruëya-alaya - the receptacle of mercy; vätsalyät - out of affection;
tava - Your; kim - what?; syät - may be; su-durlabham - very difficult to obtain.
"Dear one, for Your sake I shall bestow that gift on them." Hearing this, the _cärya
replied in great exultation, "O Bhagavän, these boys shall become servitors of Your
feet. If they are recipients of affection from You, the vessel of kindness, then what
can be difficult for them to achieve?"

athopaviöäs te sarvve / pärçvatas tasya cakriëaù
jyotsnätatyä rajanyä ca / punar äha mahä-bhujaù 16

[p.233]
atha - then; upaviöäù - seated; te - they; sarve - all; pärçvataù - to the side; tasya
- of Him; cakriëaù - of the bearer of the cakra; jyotsnä-ätatyäm - in the diffused
moonlight; rajanyäm - in the night; ca - and; punaù - again; äha - He said; mahäbhujaù - great-armed.
Next as everyone became seated in the bright moonlit night near the wielder of the
cakra, the mighty-armed Lord spoke further:

kamaläko 'si me 'téva / bhaktas tvat-kta eva hi
samägato 'ham tva ntya-gétena su-sukhé bhava 17
kamala-akaù - lotus-eyed one (Advaita's former name); asi - You are; me - My;
atéva - exceedingly; bhaktaù - devotee; tvat-kte - for Your sake; eva - indeed; hi surely; samägataù - come; aham - I; tvam - you; ntya-gétena - by dancing and
singing; su-sukhé - very happy; bhava - be.
"O Kamaläkña, lotus-eyed one, You are my supreme devotee. I have descended to
earth on Your account. Now be happy by Your dancing and singing."

tat çrutvä bhagavad-väkya / çrémat-çréväsa-paëòitaù
uväca madhurair väkyair / vinétas tat-padämbuje 18
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavat-väkyam - words of the Lord; çrématçréväsa-paëòitaù; uväca - said; madhuraiù - sweet; väkyaiù - with words; vinétaù humble; tat-pada-ambuje - at His lotus feet.
Hearing the Lord's words, Çréman Çréväsa Paëita humbly submitted in a mild tone
at the His lotus feet:

ki te 'sau bhagavad-bhaktaù / karuëeya tava prabho
tat çrutvä bhagavän kruddhas / ta nirbhartasyäbhyabhäata 19

[p.234]
kim - what; te - Your; asau - he; bhagavat-bhaktaù - the devotee of the Lord;
karuëä - mercy; iyam - this; tava - Your; prabho - O Master; tat - that; çrutvä hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; kruddha - angry; tam - Him; nirbhartasya rebuking; abhyabhäata - spoke.
"How is He Your bhakta? This is only Your mercy, Prabhu." Hearing this, the allopulent Lord angrily rebuked him, saying:

kim uddhavas tathäkrüro / bhakto me 'téva vatsalaù
äcäryo 'ya tato nyünaù / ki eva tva prabhäase 20
kim - what?; uddhavaù; tathä - also; akrüraù - Kåñëa's uncle (not cruel);
bhaktaù - devotee; me - My; atéva - very; vatsalaù - affectionate; äcäryaù - Çré
Advaita; ayam - this; tataù - therefore; nyünaù - inferior; kim - what?; evam thus; tvam - you; prabhäase - you are saying.
"Are Uddhava and Akrüra not My very dear bhaktas? Is the _cärya therefore
inferior to them? Is this what you intend to say?

ki vä bhärata-vare 'smin / äcäryyasya samo 'paraù
varttate ko 'pi mad-bhakto / yasmäd ajïo dvijo bhavän 21
kim vä - whether?; bhärata-vare - in the land of Bhärata; asmin - in this;
acäryasya - of the _cärya; samaù - equal; aparaù - greater; vartate - existing; kaù
api - who indeed?; mat-bhaktaù - My devotee; yasmät - than whom; ajïaù - fool;
dvijaù - twice-born; bhavän - your honor.
"Is there any one else in this land of Bhärata equal to or greater than this _cärya? O
brähmaëa, you have now become a fool!"

tat çrutvä bhagavad-väkya / bhétyä tüëé babhüva ha 22
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavat-väkyam - the words of the Lord; bhétyä -

[p.235]
by fear; tüëém - silent; babhüva - he became; ha - indeed.
Upon hearing these words of Bhagavän, Çréväsa became silent out of fear.

tataù proväca bhagavän / adhyätma na kadäcana
bhavadbhiù kutracid väpi / vaktavya yadi rocyate 23
tataù - then; proväca - declared; bhagavän - the Lord; adhyätmam - the self; na
kadäcana - never; bhavadbhiù - by yourselves; kutracit - anywhere; vä api whether?; vaktavyam - to be spoken; yadi - if; rocyate - it is pleasing.
Then the Lord said, "Do you never discuss the science of the self amongst your
good selves? Do you not find it pleasing?

tadä premä na dätavyo / bhavadbhyaù satyam eva hi 24
tadä - then; premä - love; na - not; dätavyaù - should be given; bhavadbhyaù to Your goodselves; satyam - truly; eva - surely; hi - indeed.
"In that case, it is certainly better not to award prema to you. This is the truth."

tat çrutvä paëòitaù präha / çréväso jagad-éçvaram
tatra me vismtir bhüyäd / yathäha na vadämi tat 25
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; paëòitaù - the scholar; präha - said; çréväsaù - the
pure devotee; jagat-éçvaram - to the universal Lord; tatra - there; me - my;
vismtiù - forgetfulness; bhüyät - it should be; yathä - so; aham - I; na - not;
vadämi - I say; tat - therefore.
After hearing this, Çréväsa Paëita replied to the jagad-éçvara. This forgetfulness of
mine has been Your blessing on me, so that I may never again speak in that way."

muräriù präha bhagavann / adhyätma na vidämy aham

[p.236]
ta präha devo jänäsi / kamaläkät çruta hi tat 26
muräriù; präha - declared; bhagavan - O Lord; adhyätmam - the science of the
self; na - not; vidämi - I know; aham - I; tam - to him; präha - He said; devaù the Lord; jänäsi - you know; kamala-akät - from the lotus-eyed Advaita; çrutam heard; hi - certainly; tat - that.
Muräri declared, "O Bhagavän, I do not know the science of the self." The Lord
answered, "Indeed you do know, for you have heard it from Kamaläkña."

iti sapadi niçamya deva-väkya / pramudita-manaso babhüvur
äryyäù
hari-hara-pada-padma-sédhu-mattä / nantur animiä ivotsaväòhyäù
27
iti - thus; sapadi - at the same instant; niçamya - hearing; deva-väkyam - the
words of the Lord; pramudita-manasaù - very elated heart; babhüvuù - they
became; äryäù - the noble persons; hari-hara - Lords Viñëu and Çiva
(Viçvambhara and Advaita); pada-padma - lotus feet; sédhu-mattäù - who were
intoxicated by the nectar; nantu - They danced; animiä - ceaselessly; iva - like;
utsava - festival; äòhyäù - abounding.
Hearing these words of the Lord, the hearts of the noble bhaktas at once became
very elated. Becoming intoxicated by the nectar from Çré Çré Hari-Hara's lotus feet,
they incessantly sang and danced as if participating in a flourishing festival.

Thus ends the Sixth Sarga entitled "The Material World Compared to a Forest
and the Glories of Çré Advaita," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

* * *

[p.237]
Seventh Sarga
bhakta-anugrahaù
Gaura Shows Mercy to His Devotees

sita-naväçuka-mastaka-veöanas / taruëa-vidruma-sannibha-häradhk
vara-bhuja-dyuti-raïjita-kaìkanaù / sphuöa-navéna-saroja-karo
babhau 1
sita - white; nava - new; açuka - cloths; mastaka - heads; veöanaù - wrapped;
taruëa - fresh; vidruma - coral; sannibha - like; hära - necklaces; dhk - held; varabhuja - beautiful arms; dyuti - light; raïjita - pleasant; kaìkanaù - bracelets;
sphuöa - blossoming; navéna - newly; sara-ja - water-born (lotus); karaù - hand;
babhau - shone.
Gauräìga's head was wrapped with a turban of new white cloth, and He wore
necklaces of newly polished coral. Lustrous bracelets adorned His arms, and His
hands resembled newly blossomed lotuses.

calaceli-nibaddha-dhaöädharo / 'ruëa-bahir vasano naöa-veça-dhk
vara-nitamba-vilambita-bähu- / vara-vilambi-näga-patiù sphuöam 2
calaceli - gold; nibaddha - bound; dhaöa - cloth worn around the loins; ädharaù
- held; aruëa - saffron; bahiù vasanaù - external garment or dhoöé; naöa-veça dress of an actor; dhk - holding; vara-nitamba - beautiful hips; vilambita hanging; bähu-vara - beautiful arms; vilambi - hanging; näga-patiù - serpentking; sphuöam - expanded hood.
A glittering gold cloth was bound about His loins over His dhoöi, which was
artfully arranged like that of a dancing actor and had the saffron color of the rising
sun. His beautiful arms hung by His hips like the expanded hoods of the serpentking.

[p.238]
caraëa-paìkaja-raïjita-nüpuro / vara-nakha-dyuti-raïjita-çéta-guù
pada-tala-dyuti-raïjita-vidrumo / druta-suvarëa-ruciù çanakair
vrajan 3
caraëa-paìkaja - lotus feet; raïjita - charming; nüpuraù - anklebells; varanakha - precious toenails; dyuti - light; raïjita - delighting; çéta-guù - moonlight; pada-tala - foot-soles; dyuti-raïjita - reddish light; vidrumaù - coral; druta melted; su-varëa - gold; ruciù - luster; çanakaiù - gently; vrajan - went.
Anklebells rang enchantingly on His lotus feet, and His precious toenails emitted a
light that delighted the heart like moonlight. His body had an effulgence like that of
molten gold, and as they walked softly, the soles of His feet radiated a ruddy luster
like that of coral.

parinanartta lasan-mukha-paìkajo / nija-janair nija-nämaparäyaëaiù
madhu-ripor madhu-géta-su-gäyanaiù / sura-gaëair divi deva-patir
yathä 4
parinanarta - He danced all around; lasan - shining; mukha-paìkajaù - lotus
face; nija-janaiù - with His own men; nija - His own; näma - names; paräyaëaiù with they who were absorbed; madhu-ripoù - of the enemy of Madhu, Çré Këa;
madhu-géta - charming songs; su-gäyanaiù - by fine singers; sura-gaëaiù - by the
hosts of gods; divi - in heaven; deva-patiù - the master of the gods; yathä - like.
The Lord, whose face appeared like a blossoming lotus flower, danced in all the
quarters of the town, accompanied by His dear associates who were absorbed in
singing honeyed songs of the names of the enemy of Madhu. Thus Gaura appeared
like Indra, the lord of heaven, surrounded by the host of gods.

kara-yugähata-sädhu-su-mandirä- / rava-sudhä vasudhä-talaväsinäm

[p.239]
mudam adhät kala-kaëöha-ravänvitä / su-manasä aniça kamaläpateù 5
kara-yuga - pair of hands; ähata - clapping; sädhu - good beat; su-mandira fine temple; ärava-sudhä - nectarean sounds; vasudhä-tala - the earth planet;
väsinäm - of the residents; mudam - delight; adhät - awarded; kala-kaëöha melodious voice; rava - sounds; anvitä - filled with; su-manasä - of those of
elevated consciousness; aniçam - incessantly; kamalä-pateù - of the master of
Lakmé.
The great minds dwelling on the earth delighted incessantly in the nectarean
vibrations made by the rhythmic hand-clapping of the Lord of Lakñmé together with
the melodious resonance of His voice within the sanctified temple.

upaviçan nava-kambala-samvte / hari-haro 'tra vicitro raräma
sura-ghe nija-loka-samävte / varada ävavdhe nija-tejasä 6
upaviçan - sitting; nava-kambala-samvte - being surrounded by a new shawl;
hari-haraù - Lords Viñëu and Çiva; atra - then; vicitraù - astonishing; raräma took pleasure; sura-ghe - in the temple; nija-loka-samävte - surrounded by His
own men; vara-de - the awarder of boons; ävavdhe - flourished; nija-tejasä - with
His own splendrous majesty.
Covered by new shawls, Their astonishing Lordships Hari-Hara (Gaura ö Advaita)
were seated in the temple, surrounded by intimate devotees. They revelled, awarded
boons, and flourished with magnificent splendor.

tataù proväca çréväsa / madhura madhu-südanaù
çré-bhaktir asyä väsas tvam / ataù çréväsa ucyate 7
tataù - then; proväca - declared; çréväsam - the pure devotee; madhuram sweet; madhu-südanaù - slayer of the demon Madhu; çré-bhaktiù - beautiful
devotion; asyäù - of her; väsaù - dwelling; tvam - you; ataù - therefore; ucyate - it

[p.240]
is said.
Then in sweet tones the slayer of the Madhu proclaimed to Çréväsa, "You are the
väsa (abode) of çré bhakti, pure devotion. Therefore you are known as Çréväsa."

gopénätham idam präha / tva me däsa iti smtam 8
gopénätham - to Gopénätha _cärya; idam - this; präha - He said; tvam - you; me My; däsaù - servant; iti - thus; smtam - remembered.
To Gopénatha _cärya, He said, "I have remembered You as My servant."

tataù proväca karuëo / muräri tä paöha svayam
kavitä bhavataù çrutvä / sa papäöha çubhäkaram 9
tataù - then; proväca - declared; karuëa - the compassionate Lord; murärim Muräri Gupta, the incarnation of Hanumän; täm - that; paöha - please recite;
svayam - of your own accord; kavitäm - poetry; bhavataù - by Your honor; çrutvä
- hearing; saù - he; papäöha - recited; çubha-akaram - pleasing accents.
The compassionate Lord Gauräìga commanded Muräri Gupta, "Please recite from
your heart that poetry composed by your good self." Hearing this order, Muräri
chanted with pleasing accents the following hymn:
Çré Rämäöakam
by Çréla Muräri Gupta

räjat-kiréöa-maëi-dédhiti-dépitäçam / udyad-bhaspati-kavi-pratime
vahanta
dve kuëòale 'ìka-rahitendu-samäna-vaktra / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 10
räjat - shining; kiréöa - crown; maëi - jewels; dédhita - splendor; dépita -

[p.241]
illuminated; äçam - face; udyat - rising; bhaspati - Jupiter; kavi - Venus; pratime resembling; vahantam - bearing; dve - two; kuëòale - earrings; aìka-rahita - free
of spots; indu - moon; samäna - like; vaktram - moon; rämam - the reservoir of
pleasure; jagat-traya - three worlds; gurum - spiritual master; satatam perpetually; bhajämi - I worship.
Though His face is like a spotless moon, still it is further brightened by a shining
crown of jewels. His earrings resemble Jupiter and Venus rising in the evening sky. I
forever worship this Lord Çré Räma, guru of the three worlds.

udyad-vibhäkara-maréci-vibodhitäbja- / netra su-bimba-daçanacchada-cäru-näsam
çubhräçu-raçmi-parinirjjita-cäru-häsa / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 11
udyat - rising; vibhä-äkara - the sun; maréci - rays; vibodhita - awakening; abjanetram - lotus eyes; su-bimba - beautifully red like the bimba fruit; daçana-chada
- teeth-covering (the lips); cäru-näsam - graceful nose; çubhra-açu - moon; raçmi
- rays; parinirjita - defeated; cäru-häsam - sweet smile.
When He awakens and opens His lotus eyes, their luster resembles the early rays
of the rising sun. His teeth are enclosed by charming bimba fruit-red lips. His nose
is shapely and graceful and seeing the beams of His beautiful smile, the white-rayed
moon accepts defeat. I forever worship this Lord Çré Räma, guru of the three worlds.

ta kambu-kaëöham ajam ambuja-tulya-rüpa / muktävalé-kanakahära-dhta vibhäntam
vidyud-baläka-gaëa-sayutam ambu-da vä / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 12
tam - Him; kambu-kaëöham - neck like a conch; ajam - unborn; ambu-ja - a
lotus; tulya - like; rüpam - form; muktä-avalé - string; kanaka - gold; hära necklace; dhtam - held; vibhäntam - shining; vidyut - lightning; baläka - cranes;

[p.242]
gaëa - flocks; sayutam - together with; ambu-dam - water-giver (cloud); vä - or.
The throat of the unborn Lord is like a three-ringed conchshell, and His form is
soft as the lotus. He wears a shining necklace of pearls set in gold, and thus He
resembles a water-laden cloud accompanied by lightning flashes and a flock of
cranes. Such is Çré Räma, guru of the three worlds, whom I perpetually adore.

uttäna-hasta-tala-sastha-sahasra-patra / païca-cchadädhika-çata
pravaräìgulébhiù
kurvvaty açéta-kanaka-dyuti yasya sétä / pärçve 'sti ta raghu-vara
satata bhajämi 13
uttäna - turned upwards; hasta-tala - palms; sastha - situated; sahasra-patram thousand-petalled (a lotus flower); païca - five; cchada - covered; adhika - more;
çatam - a hundred; pravara - excellent; aìgulébhiù - by Her fingers; kurvati - She
does; açéta-kanaka - molten gold; dyutiù - light; yasya - He whose; sétä - Sétä
Devé; pärçve - by His side; asti - there is; tam - Him; raghu-varam - best of the
Raghu dynasty; satatam - perpetually; bhajämi - I adore.
In Her upraised hand Sétä Devé holds a thousand-petalled lotus flower, and Her five
graceful fingers make it appear that the flower's hundred petals are covered by
another five petals. I forever worship Räma, best of the Raghu dynasty, by whose
side forever remains this Sétä, whose radiance is like molten gold.

agre dhanurddhara-varaù kanakojjvaläìgo / jyeöhänu-sevana-rato
vara-bhüaëäòhyaù
çeäkhya-dhäma-vara-lakmaëa-näma yasya / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 14
agre - in the front; dhanuù-dhara-varaù - best bow-holder; kanaka - gold;
ujjvala - blazing; aìgaù - body; jyeöha - elder; anusevana - serving; rataù attached; vara-bhüaëa - fine ornaments; äòhyaù - enriched; çea-äkhya - called
Çeña; dhäma - abode; vara - enclosing; lakmaëa-näma - named Lakñmaëa; yasya -

[p.243]
whose.
Before Räma stands his brother Lakñmaëa, deeply attached to His elder brother's
service, the most skilled of archers, his body brilliant golden, and enhanced by
splendid ornaments. He is also known as Çeña, the all-accomodating abode of the
worlds. I worship this Lord Çré Rama guru of the three worlds.

yo räghavendra-kula-sindhu-sudhäçu-rüpo / märéca-räkasa-subähumukhän nihatya
yajïa raraka kuçikänvaya-puëya-räçi / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 15
yaù - who; räghava-indra - best of the Raghus; kula-sindhu - ocean of the
dynasty; sudhä-açu - moon; rüpaù - form; märéca-räkasa - man-eater named
Märéca; subähu-mukhän - headed by Subähu; nihatya - slain; yajïam - sacrifice;
raraka - protected; kuçika - Viçvämitra; anvaya - lineage; puëya - pious; räçim heaps.
Like the nectar-rayed moon shining on the ocean of the Raghu dynasty, He slew the
foremost among the man-eating demons, Märéca and Subähu, thus protecting the
sacrifice performed by the sage Viçvämitra for the welfare of His ancstors. I worship
this Lord Çré Räma, guru of the three worlds.

hatvä khara-triçirasau sa-gaëau kabandha / çré-daëòa-känanam
adüaëam eva ktvä
sugréva-maitram akarod vinihatya çatru / ta räghava daçamukhänta-kara bhajämi 16
hatvä - having killed; khara-triçirasau - the two brothers of Rävaëa named
Khara and Triçirä; sa-gaëau - with their hordes; kabandham - the demon named
Kabandha; çré-daëòa-känanam - the sacred forest of Daëòa; adüaëam - free of
violating; eva - surely; ktvä - made; sugréva - the monkey king named Sugréva;
maitram - friendship; akarot - made; vinihatya - killing; çatrum - the enemy

[p.244]
(Bäli); räghavam - best of the Raghu dynasty; tam - Him; daça-mukha - the tenheaded one, Rävaëa; antakaram - the causer of death; bhajämi - I adore.
Slaying the räkñasas Khara, Triçirä, Kabandha, and their armies, He rendered safe
the forest of Daëòa-känana. By killing thevmonkey-king, Sugréva's enemy, Bäli, He
made alliance with him, I adore Çré Räma, best of the Raghu dynasty, the slayer of
the ten-headed Rävaëa.

bhaìktvä pinäkam akaroj janakätmajäyä / vaivähikotsava-vidhi
pathi bhärgavendram
jitvä pitur mudam uväha kakutstha-varyya / räma jagat-traya-guru
satata bhajämi 17
bhaìktvä - having broken; pinäkam - bow; akarot - He did; janaka-ätma-jäyäù of the daughter of Mahäräja Janaka; vaivähika - marriage; utsava-vidhim - the
rites of marriage; pathi - on the path; bhärgava-indram - Paraçuräma; jitvä having defeated; pituù - of His father; mudam - happiness; uväha - brought;
kakutstha-varyam - the best of the descendants of Kakutstha (a king of the solar
dynasty).
After breaking Çiva's bow, He married Sétä, daughter of Janaka-räja. Then on the
path home, He defeated the mighty Paraçuräma, best of Bhågu's line, bringing
pleasure to Mahäräja Daçaratha, His father. I forever worship this Lord Çré Räma,
the foremost descendant of Kakutstha and guru of the three worlds.

* * * * *
ittha niçamya raghu-nandana-räja-siha- / çlokäöaka sa bhagavän
caraëa muräreù
vaidyasya mürddhni vinidhäya lilekha bhäle / tva räma-däsa iti bho
bhava mat-prasädät 18
ittham - thus; niçamya - hearing; raghu-nandana - the delight of the Raghu

[p.245]
dynasty; räja-siha - the lion among kings; çloka-aöakam - eight verses; saù - He;
bhagavän - all-opulent Lord; caraëam - feet; muräreù - of Muräri; vaidyasya - of
the physician; mürdhni - on the head; vinidhäya - placing; lilekha - He wrote;
bhäle - on the forehead; tvam - you; räma-däsaù - the servant of Räma; iti - thus;
bho - Oh!; bhava - be; mat-prasädät - by My mercy.
After hearing these eight verses composed by the physician Muräri describing Çré
Räma, lion among kings and delight of the Raghu dynasty, Placing His foot on the
physican's head, Bhagavän Gaura Hari wrote the words "Räma Däsa" on his brow
and proclaimed, "Bho! By My mercy, be forever Çré Räma's servant."

apaöhad bhagavän eka / çloka tat çëu me dvija 19
apaöhat - He recited; bhagavän - the Lord; ekam - one; çlokam - verse; tat - that;
çëu - hear; me - from me; dvija - O brähmaëa.
Then the Lord recited a çloka brähmaëa, hear that from me:

na sädhayati mä yogo / na säìkhya dharma uddhava
na svädhyäyas tapas tyägo / yathä bhaktir mamorjjitä 20
na - not; sädhayati - it controls; mäm - Me; yogaù - mystic perfections; na - not;
säìkhyam - analytical study of the elements; dharmaù - virtuous behavior;
uddhava - O Uddhava; na - not; svädhyäyaù - study of the Vedas; tapaù penance; tyägaù - renunciation; yathä - as; bhaktiù - devotion; mama - My;
urjjitä - powerful.
"O Uddhava, yogic perfection, study of the elements, dharmic äcära, Vedic study,
penance and renunciation can not capture My heart as can mighty bhakti." (Çrémad
Bhägavatam 11.14.20)

paöhitveda punaù präha / sarvväs tatra samägatän
bhavadbhir eva karttavya / çréväsasya vicärane 21

[p.246]
paöhitvä - having recited; idam - this; punaù - again; präha - He said; sarvän all; tatra - there; samägatän - assembled; bhavadbhiù - by your good selves; eva surely; kartavyam - should be done; çréväsasya - of Çrévasa; vicärane - for the
examination.
Then He said to the bhakta-vånda, "In all that you do, first present it for the
consideration of Çréväsa.

yat syät tad eva nitya vaù / kuçala tad bhaviyati
çré-räma-paëòita-jyeöha-bhrät-sevä mad-arccanäù 22
yat - what; syät - it may be; tat - that; eva - surely; nityam - always; vaù - of
you; kuçalam - proper; tat - that; bhaviyati - it will be; çré-räma-paëòita-jyeöhabhrät - the elder brother of Çré Räma Paëita; sevä - services; mat-arcanäù - My
worship.
"In this way, all actions you perform shall be done properly, for service to the elder
brother of Çré Räma Paëita, is worship of Myself.

iti buddhyä viniçcitya / kuru çréväsa-sevanam
tena te sakala bhadra / sadä nitya bhaviyati 23
iti - thus; buddhyä - by intelligence; viniçcitya - determining; kuru - do; çréväsasevanam - service to Çréväsa; tena - by that; te - your; sakalam - all; bhadram auspicious; sadä - always; nityam - regularly; bhaviyati - it will be.
"Firmly comprehend this with your intelligence and render service to Çréväsa. In
this way everything will be auspicious for you."

ity uktvä harayan lokän / reme praëata-vatsalaù
bhakta-vatsalatä tasya / dövä sarvve sukha yayuù 24
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; harayan - enlivening; lokän - the people; reme - He

[p.247]
took pleasure; praëata-vatsalaù - affectionate to the surrendered; bhaktavatsalatäm - the quality of affection to the devotee; tasya - His; dövä - seeing;
sarve - all; sukham - happy; yayuù - became.
So saying, the Lord who is affectionate to surrendered souls delighted the hearts of
the people. Everyone became happy to see the quality of His affection for His
bhaktas.

çréväsenärpita dugdha / püga mälya sa-dhüpakam
bubhuje bhagaväs tatra / çeän bhtyäya dattavän 25
çréväsena - by Çréväsa; arpitam - offered; dugdham - milk; pügam - betel;
mälyam - garland; sa-dhüpakam - with incense; bubhuje - He enjoyed; bhagavän;
tatra - there; çeän - the remnants; bhtyäya - to His servant; dattavän - gave.
Çréväsa offered milk, betel, garlands and fragrant incense to Gaura. After eating
and appreciating these items, He gave the remnants to His servant.

çréväsa-bhrät-tanayäbhartkä madhura-dyutiù
präpya hareù prasäda ca / rauti näräyaëé çubhä 26
çréväsa-bhrät - of Çréväsa's brother; tanayä - the daughter; abhartkä - without a
husband; madhura-dyutiù - charming effulgence; präpya - obtaining; hareù - of
Hari; prasädam - mercy; ca - and; rauti - cried aloud; näräyaëé-çubhä - the
virtuous Näräyaëé.
Saintly Näräyaëé was Çréväsa's brother's unmarried daughter. Her skin had a sweet
luster. Whenever she obtained the prasädam of Çré Hari she wept loudly.

iti sakala-niçä ninäya devo / nija-jana-manasä mude muräriù
kaëam iva mahad vatsareëa mene / 'navarata sukham äpur äryyavaryyäù 27

[p.248]
iti - thus; sakala - all; niçäm - of the nights; ninäya - passed, guiding; devaù Lord; nija-jana-manasäm - of the minds of His own men; mude - enjoyed; muräri
- the enemy of Murä; kaëam iva - like a moment; mahat - great; vatsareëa - like a
year; mene - thought; anavaratam - incessant; sukham - happiness; äpuù - they
attained; ärya-varyäù - best of noble men.
In this way the Lord joyously passed every night in guiding His people, and those
noble souls experienced incessant bliss. A full year passed yet the enemy of Mura
thought it only a moment.

Thus ends the Seventh Sarga entitled "Gaura Shows Mercy to His Devotees,"
in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eighth Sarga
avadhüta-anugrahaù
Gaura Hari Shows Mercy to the Avadhüta

tataù prabhäte vimale / natvä ta puruarabham
gatvä nijäçrama sarvve / snätvä devärccanädikam 1
tataù - thus; prabhäte - in the dawn; vimale - pure; natvä - having bowed
down; tam - Him; purua-abham - the best of persons; gatvä - going; nijaäçramam - to His own äçrama; sarve - all; snätvä - having bathed; deva-arcana worship of the Deity; ädikam - headed by.
In the pure light of dawn, after bowing to the feet of their best of lords, all of His
bhaktas would return to their respective äçramas and perform their morning duties
beginning with worship of the arcana of çré-vigraha.

[p.249]
ktvä bhuktvä yathä-nyäyam / äjagmus tat-padämbujam
tän dövä hara-sampürëo / bhagavän madhu-südanaù 2
ktvä - after preparing; bhuktvä - eating; yathä-nyäyam - according to the
principles; äjagmuù - they came; tat-pada-ambujam - to the Lord's lotus feet; tän them; dövä - seeing; hara-sampürëaù - filled with joy; bhagavän - the illustrious
Lord; madhu-südanaù - the killer of Madhu.
After preparing, offering, and eating foodstuffs in proper accord with çästra, they
returned to Gaura's lotus feet. Upon seeing them, Gaura, who slays every demonlike
doubt in the mind of His bhakta, became filled with jubilation.

tataù proväca bhagavän / avadhütaù samägataù
nityänanda iti khyäto / mahätmä ta samänaya 3
tataù - then; proväca - announced; bhagavän - all-opulent Lord; avadhütaù aloof from wordly convention; samägataù - come; nityänandaù; iti - thus;
khyätaù - famed; mahä-ätmä - great soul; tam - Him; samänaya - please bring.
Once He announced, "Avadhüta-bhagavän, celebrated by the name Nityänanda has
now come. Go, bring that great soul to Me.

he räma tva muräre ca / näräyaëa-mukundakau
gacchadhva sa-tvarä yüya / yaträste sa mahä-matiù 4
he räma - O Räma; tvam - you; muräre - O Muräri; ca - and; näräyaëamukundakau - Näräyaëa and Mukunda; gacchadhvam - go; sa-tvarä - with speed;
yüyam - you; yatra - where; aste - he is staying; saù - he; mahä-matiù - of great
mind.
"He Räma and you, Muräri, Näräyaëa and Mukunda! Quickly go where that great
soul is staying.

[p.250]
tatas tad-äjïayä sarvve / dakiëe gräma-sannidhau
vicäryya ta na dövä te / saméyus tatra sannidhim 5
tataù - then; tat - His; äjïayä - by the order; sarve - all; dakiëe - to the south;
gräma-sannidhau - in the vicinity of the town; vicärya - searched; tam - Him; na
- not; dövä - seeing; te - they; saméyuù - they returned; tatra - there; sannidhim vicinity.
All of them searched for Nityänanda in the southern part of the town according to
His order, but being unable to find Him they returned to Gauräìga's presence.

te natvä ta sura-çreöha / procur näsmäbhir adya saù
dta ity abravét täç ca / punar gacchata sämpratam 6
te - they; natvä - bowing; tam - to Him; sura-çreöham - the best of divinities;
procuù - they declared; na - not; asmäbhiù - by us; adya - today; saù - he; dtaù seen; iti - thus; abravét - He said; tän - to them; ca - but; punaù - again; gacchata you go; sämpratam - now.
Bowing on the ground before the supreme God, the devotees informed him,
"Today we were unable to see Him." But Çacé-nandana commanded, "You must go
out again.

sväçrame sa ca draöavyaù / säyähne sa mahä-manäù
tat çrutvä te yathä-sthäna / yayur höä ktähnikäù 7
sva-äçrame - in His own äçrama; saù - He; ca - and; draöavyaù - can be seen;
säyähne - at evening; saù - He; mahä-manäù - great mind; tat - that; çrutvä hearing; te - they; yathä-sthänam - to the proper place; yayuù - they went; höäù jolly; kta-ahnikäù - having performed daily duties.
"That great soul can be seen near His äçrama at dusk." Hearing this, the devotees
first performed their daily duties (such as bathing and chanting of gäyatré-mantra),

[p.251]
then they proceeded with merry hearts to the correct place.

tataù säyähne veläyä / pathi gacchan jagad-guruù
muräri präha dövä tam / ägaccha tatra yatra saù 8
tataù - then; säyähne - at dusk; veläyäm - boundary; pathi - on the path;
gacchan - going; jagat-guruù - spiritual master of all living beings; murärim - to
Muräri Gupta; präha - said; dövä - seeing; tam - Him; ägaccha - come; tatra there; yatra - where; saù - he.
On the verge of dusk, as the guru of all living beings strolled upon the path, He
glimpsed Nityänanda and exclaimed to Muräri, "There He is! Come, let us go to
Him.

samäyäto muni-çreöho / nandanäcäryya-veçmani
taträham api gacchämi / draöu ta puruarabham 9
samäyätaù - having come; muni-çreöhaù - chief of sages; nandana-äcärya;
veçmani - in the house of; tatra - there; aham - I; api - indeed; gacchämi - I am
going; draöum - to see; tam - Him; purua-abham - the best of persons.
"That chief of sages has entered the house of Nandanäcärya. I must certainly go
there to encounter that most eminent of personalities."

sa-muräri-sthito devo / bhakta-varga-samanvitaù
premänanda-rase magno / nandanäcäryya-sad-ghe 10
gatvä dadarça ta deva / nityänanda sukhoitam 11
sa-muräri - with Muräri; sthitaù - situated; devaù - the Divine Personality;
bhakta-varga-samanvitaù - with the group of devotees; prema-änanda - bliss of
love; rase - in the mellow; magnaù - merged; nandana-äcärya - of Nandana
_cärya; sat-ghe - in the sanctified house; gatvä - went; dadarça - He saw; tam Him; devam - Lord; nityänandam; sukha-uitam - resting happily.

[p.252]
Accompanied by Muräri Gupta and the group of bhaktas, the Divine Lord,
immersed in premänanda-rasa, went to the sanctified residence of Nandanäcärya,
and there He saw Nityänanda happily resting.

tataù praëamya ta bhaktyä / bhagavän madhuräkaram
hari-saìkérttana ktvä / nanartta lalita mudä 12
tataù - then; praëamya - bowing to the ground; tam - to Him; bhaktyä - with
devotion; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; madhura-akaram - sweet words; harisaìkértanam - congregational chanting of Hari's names; ktvä - made; nanarta danced; lalitam - lilting; mudä - with joy.
The illustrious Gaura bowed devotedly before Nityänanda, and then He began a
lilting saìkértana of Hari-näma while dancing out of joy.
tato nanartta tam anu / nityänando mahä-yaçäù

huìkära-häsya-sampürëaù / pulakäìkita-vigrahaù 13
tataù - then; nanarta - He danced; tam - Him; anu - following; nityänandaù the ever-blissful; mahä-yaçäù - wide-spread fame; huìkära - roaring; häsya laughing; sampürëaù - overbrimming; pulaka - thrill-bumps; aìkita - marked;
vigrahaù - form.
Then the very famous Nityänanda followed in Gaura's footsteps, His mouth filled
with roaring and laughter, and His body was marked by pulakas.

ntyävasäne devas tu / tat-päda-rajasä punaù
bhtyasya mastaka pütam / akarot kamalä-patiù 14
ntya - dancing; avasäne - at the end; devaù - the Lord; tu - indeed; tat-pädarajasä - with the dust of Nityänanda's feet; punaù - further; bhtyasya - of His
servants; mastakam - the head; pütam - purified; akarot - did; kamalä-patiù Lord of Lakmé.

[p.253]
When the kamalä-pati finished dancing, He collected Nityänanda's footdust and
placed it upon the heads of His servants for their purification.

tataù pratasthe sva-gha / kathayan tat-kathäù çubhäù
aho mahätmä kathayaty / aya këa-çubhäkaram 15
ädau jïäna bhavet pusaù / tato bhaktir harau bhavet
tato viraktir bhogeu / bhaved eva kramäd iha 16
tataù - then; pratasthe - He set forth; sva-gham - to His home; kathayan telling; tat-kathäù - talks about Nityänanda; çubhäù- auspicious; aho - Oh!; mahäätmä - great soul; kathayati - narrates; ayam - this; këa - the all-attractive; çubhaäkaram - a mine of auspiciousness; ädau - in the beginning; jïänam knowledge; bhavet - it may be; pusaù - of a man; tataù - then; bhaktiù - devotion;
harau - unto Hari; bhavet - it may be; tataù - then; viraktiù - detachment; bhogeu for sense pleasures; bhavet - it may be; eva - surely; kramät - in sequence; iha in this world.
Then Çré Gauräìga departed for His home. On the way, He began explaining the
exalted topics spoken by Çré Nityänanda to Him on Kåñëa consciousness, "O how
that great soul spoke! He said that initially one should develop knowledge of Këa,
which brings auspiciousness; then comes devotion for Çré Hari, and then
detachment from sense pleasures will naturally take place. This is the proper
sequence whereby one can advance in spiritual life within this world.'"

ity uktvä pathi deveço / jagäma nija-mandiram
kathayäm äsa tat sarvva / sva-mätuç caraëäntike 17
iti - so; uktvä - saying; pathi - on the path; deva-éçaù - Lord of the demigods;
jagäma - He went; nija-mandiram - to His own abode; kathayäm äsa - He told;
tat - that; sarvam - all; sva-mätuù - of His mother; caraëa-antike - to the tips of
her feet.

[p.254]
So saying, they travelled on the path to Gauräìga's home. Upon arrival, the Lord of
the devas narrated all that had happened as an offering at His mother's feet.

athäpara-dine präpte / nityänandäya dhémate
bhékä dadau candanena / ktvä sarvväìga-lepanam 18
atha - then; apara-dine - on the next day; präpte - arrived; nityänandäya - to
Nityänanda; dhémate - to the intelligent; bhékäm - alms; dadau - He gave;
candanena - with sandalwood pulp; ktvä - made; sarva-aìga - the entire body;
lepanam - anointing.
Then when the next day came, Çré Gauräìga invited the intelligent Nityänanda to
accept alms with Him. Thereupon He anointed Nityänanda's entire body with the
pulp of sandalwood.

mälyam arghya ca naivedya / dattvä püjä cakära ca
eva sampüjitas tena / nityänanda-mahäprabhuù 19
mälyam - garland; arghyam - gift; ca - and; naivedyam - foods offered to the
Lord; dattvä - gave; püjäm - worship; cakära - performed; ca - and; evam - thus;
sampüjitaù - fully worshipped; tena - by Him; nityänanda - the ever blissful
Lord; mahä-prabhuù - great Master.
He made honorable presentations to Him of garlands, valuable gifts, and sanctified
foodstuffs. Then He offered äratrika. Thus was Nityänanda Mahäprabhu nicely
worshipped by Gaura.

tatra sthitvä para-dine / çréväsasyäçrama yayau
avadhüta ca bhékärtha / nimantraëam athäkarot 20
tatra - there; sthitvä - staying; para-dine - on the next day; çréväsasya - of
Çréväsa; äçramam - place for spiritual shelter; yayau - he went; avadhütam - aloof

[p.255]
from convention; ca - and; bhéka-artham - to take alms; nimantraëam invitation; atha - then; akarot - he made.
Lord Nityänanda stayed there that day, and on the morrow he went to the äçrama
of Çréväsa, who invited the avadhüta to accept alms from him.

ta paëòitaù praëayena / bhékä su-sasktä dadau
tato bhuktvä varänna sa / çraddhayä pävana mahat 21
tam - Him; paëòitaù - learned in transcendence; praëayena - with love; bhékäm alms; su-sasktäm - nicely prepared; dadau - he offered; tataù - then; bhuktvä after eating; vara-annam - fine foods; saù - he; çraddhayä - with respect;
pävanam - sanctifying; mahat - great.
That Paëita lovingly offered Nityänanda nicely prepared foods, whereupon
Nityänanda respectfully ate that great quantity of sanctified and excellent food.

sthitas tatraiva bhagavän / ägatas tat-kaëena tu
devälaye çubhe deva / upaviçya varäsäne 22
sthitaù - situated; tatra - there; eva - surely; bhagavän - the Lord; ägataù came; tat-kaëena - in a moment; tu - indeed; deva-alaye - in the temple; çubhe splendrous; devaù - the Lord; upaviçya - sat; vara-äsäne - on a fine seat.
While Nityänanda was staying there, suddenly Bhagavän Gaura entered the
splendid temple and sat upon an excellent seat.

pürva-léläm anusmtya / priyä madhurayä girä
uväca paçya mä tva hi / mad-artha ktavän çramam 23
pürva-léläm - former pastimes (as Kåñëa and Balaräma); anusmtya remembering; priyäm - very dear; madhurayä - with sweet; girä - with words;
uväca - He said; paçya - just see!; mäm - Me; tvam - you; hi - certainly; mat-

[p.256]
artham - for My sake; ktavän - have done; çramam - toil.
Remembering Their former pastimes (as Kåñëa and Balaräma in Vraja), the Lord
addressed Nityänanda in a charming tone, "For the purpose of attaining Me, You
have strived so arduously. Now look upon My person!"

avadhüto mano-väca / çrutvä tasya mahätmanaù
avalokya ca ta bhaktyä / viçea nävabudhyata 24
avadhütaù; mana-väcam - thoughts; çrutvä - heard; tasya - His; mahä-ätmanaù of the great soul; avalokya - glancing; ca - and; tam - Him; bhaktyä - with
devotion; viçeam - specifically na - not; avabudhyata - He was aware.
When he heard the words which hinted at the truth of Mahäprabhu, the avadhüta
glanced back at Him with devotion, but He did not clearly understand their
meaning.

taj-jïätvä bhagavän sarvvän / vaiëavän präha gacchata
yüya ghäd bahiù sarvve / tatas te niryayur ghät 25
tat - that; jïätvä - knowing; bhagavän - the Lord; sarvän - all; vaiëavän - the
vaiñëavas; präha - announced; gacchata - you must go; yüyam - you; ghät - from
the house; bahiù - outside; sarve - all; tataù - then; te - they; niryayuù - they
went; ghät - from the house.
Knowing this, the illustrious Lord announced to all the vaiñëavas, "All of you must
now leave the house," and they did so.

tataù sandarçayäm äsa / nityänandäya sa prabhuù
sva-vaibhava sva-mädhuryya / kautukäyäkhileçvaraù 26
tataù - then; sandarçayäm äsa - He showed; nityänandäya - to Nityänanda; saù He; prabhuù - the Master; sva-vaibhavam - His glories; sva-mädhuryam - His

[p.257]
sweetness; kautukäyä - to the curious; akhila-éçvaraù - the supreme controller of
all.
Then Gaura Prabhu, the supreme master of all, displayed His opulence and
sweetness to the eager and curious Nityänanda.

sa dadarça tato rüpa / këasya aò-bhuja mahat
kaëäc catur-bhuja rüpa / dvi-bhujaç ca tataù kaëät 27
saù - He; dadarça - saw; tataù - then; rüpam - a form; këasya - of Kåñëa;aöbhujam - with six arms; mahat - great; kaëät - after a moment; catuù-bhujam - of
four arms; rüpam - form; dvi-bhujaù - of two arms; ca - and; tataù - then; kaëät after a moment.
The avadhüta saw a very magnificent form of Gaura Kåñëa displaying six arms.
After a moment He saw the Lord's four-armed form, and a moment later His form of
two arms.

aty-adbhuta tato dövä / hareëa vismayena ca
jahäsa ca punar dhémän / nanartta ca mudä sakt 28
ati-adbhutam - very wonderful; tataù - then; dövä - having seen; hareëa - with
jubilation; vismayena - with astonishment; ca - and; jahäsa - He laughed; ca and; punaù - again; dhémän - sage; nanarta - He danced; ca - and; mudä - with
joy; sakt - at once.
Upon beholding to his great joy and astonishment those very marvellous forms
within the body of Çacé's son, at once laughing and laughing the sage out of gladness
began to dance.

deväjïayä näkathayad / romäïcita-tanur bhçam
vndävana-vinodé tu / bhrätä me tva praharitaù 29

[p.258]
deva-äjïayä - by the order of the Lord; na - not; akathayat - told; roma-aïcita bristling of the hairs; tanuù - the body; bhçam - profuse; vndävana-vinodé - the
enjoyer of Våndävana; tu - but; bhrätä - brother; me - My; tvam - You; praharitaù
- extremely thrilled.
By the order of Gauräìgadeva, Nityänanda did not reveal this incident to others.
But the enjoyer of Våndävana, His hairs thrilling with rapture, jubilantly acclaimed
Him, crying, "Indeed, You are My brother!"

iti yaù çëoti nhareç carita / sakala sa yajïa-phalam eva labhet
ramate mukunda-caraëämburuhe / hari-näma tasya niyata sphurati
30
iti - thus; yaù - who; çëoti - he hears; n-hareù - of Hari appearing like a man;
caritam - behavior; sakalam - all; saù - he; yajïa-phalam - the fruits of sacrifice;
eva - surely; labhet - he can obtain; ramate - he enjoys; mukunda-caraëaamburuhe - at the lotus feet of Mukunda; hari-näma - the name of Hari; tasya his; niyatam - steady devotion; sphurati - is manifested.
One who hears these descriptions of Çré MrHari's deeds while playing a human role
attains all benefits of ritualistic fire-yajïas. His mind will undeviatingly delight in
Mukunda's lotus feet, and upon his tongue the names of Hari will forever dance.

Thus ends the Eighth Sarga entitled "Gaura Hari Shows Mercy to the
Avadhüta," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Ninth Sarga
bhakta-püjä-upagrahaëam

[p.259]
The Lord Accepts the Worship of His Devotees

çrutvä kathäm atitarä mudito mahätmä / dämodaraù punar uväca
muräri-vaidyam
aty-adbhuta vada vibhor vapuaù sva-rüpa / svapnena döam api yat
puruottamena 1
çrutvä - having heard; kathäm - tale; atitaräm - exceedingly; muditaù - joyous;
mahä-ätmä - the great soul; dämodaraù - Dämodara Paëita; punaù - again; uväca said; muräri-vaidyam - Muräri, the physician; ati-adbhutam - very wonderful;
vada - tell; vibhoù - of the all-pervasive Lord; vapuaù - of the body; sva-rüpam His original form; svapnena - by dream; döam - seen; api - even; yat - which;
purua-uttamena - by the transcendent Personality of Godhead.
Hearing this narration, the great soul Dämodara became very joyous and furthered
inquired from physician Muräri, Kindly tell me whether Mahäprabhu saw in dream
the very amazing all-pervasive and original form of Çré Kåñëa .

ta präha puëya-carita sa punar muräriù / këasya çuddha-manasä
mahad-utsaväya
këa-svarüpam akhilämbara-bhüaëäòhya / svapne dadarça punar ea
navéna-këaù 2
tam - him; präha - he told; puëya-caritam - saintly character; saù - he; punaù further; muräriù; këasya - of Kåñëa; çuddha-manasäm - of those with pure
hearts; mahat-utsaväya - for the great festival; këa-svarüpam - the original form
of Kåñëa; akhila-ambara - all His apparel; bhüaëa-äòhyam - enriched by
ornaments; svapne - while dreaming; dadarça - He saw; punaù - again and again;
eaù - this; navéna-këaù - new Kåñëa.
Muräi Gupta then further narrated the history of Çré GauraKåñëa to the Paëita
whose saintly personality appears like a great festival for men of pure minds. He
said, "On many occasions this new Kåñëa saw in dreams the original form of Kåñëa

[p.260]
as He is, completely attired in sublime apparel enriched by ornaments."

rätrau ruroda bhagavän ati-vihvala sä / vékyäti-vismita-mukhé
tanaya babhäe
täta tvam adya kim ala sva-paratvam ei / çrutvä kaëäd dhtim uväha
çacé babhäe 3
rätrau - at night; ruroda - He wept; bhagavän - the Lord; ati-vihvalam completely overwhelmed; sä - she; vékyä - seeing; ati-vismita-mukhé - very
astonished face; tanayam - son; babhäe - she spoke; täta - dear son; tvam - You;
adya - today; kim - what?; alam - enough; sva-paratvam - Your other world; ei You have gone; çrutvä - hearing this; kñaëät - after a moment; dhåtim equilibrium; uväha - He maintained; çacém - Gaura's mother; babhäñe - He
spoke.
At night His heart wholly overwhelmed with love, the illustrious lord wept. Filled
with wonder His Çacé Mätä asked him, "Dear son, what's the matter with You?
Today You seem to have entered another world." Hearing her, Gauräìga took a
moment to collect His equilibrium, and replied:

svapne mayädya nava-nérada-tulya-käntir / mäyüra-piccha-varahäöaka-kaìkanäòhyaù
bälo laläöa-vilasat-kuöilälakaç ca / vaçé-karo ravi-karojjvala-pétavastraù 4
svapne - in a dream; mayä - by Me; adya - today; nava-nérada - a new cloud;
tulya -like; käntiù - effulgence; mäyüra - of a peacock; piccha - feathers; vara beautiful; häöaka - golden; kaìkana - bracelets; äòhyaù - enriched; bälaù - the
boy; laläöa - forehead; vilasat - shining; kuöila - curling; alakaù - locks; ca - and;
vaçé - flute; karaù - in hand; ravi-kara - rays of the sun; ujjvala - brilliant; pétavastraù - yellow garment.
"I dreamt today of a boy. His luster resembled the darkblue-black torrential rain-

[p.261]
clouds of the rainy season. On His head a crest of peacock flumes shone. His arms
were adorned by excellent golden bangles, and His lustrous brow encircled by
curling locks. In His hands He held a bamboo flute, and His yellow garments were
brilliant like the sunrays.

döo 'ti-vihvalatayä 'çrubhir ävtäìgo / rodimy anantaram anantasukha mamäbhüt
çrutvä çacé-suta-mukhäd vacanämta sä / haränvitä smita-mukhé sumukhé babhüva 5
döaù - seen; ati-vihvalatayä - on account of being overwhelmed; açrubhiù - by
tears; ävta-aìgaù - body covered; rodimi - I weep; anantaram - afterwards;
ananta-sukham - limitless happiness; mama - My; abhüt - it was; çrutvä - heard;
çacé-suta-mukhät - from the mouth of the son of Çacé; vacana-amtam - words of
nectar; sä - she; hara-anvitä - filled by thrills; smita-mukhé - smiling face; sumukhé - sweet-faced; babhüva - she became.
Seen this boy, I am overwhelmed by ecstatic love for Him. I weep, and thus My
body is covered by tears. Since that moment I have filled with boundless joy."
Hearing her son's ambrosial words, Çacé Devé also became filled with jubilation, and
her gentle face was covered by smiles.

viçvambharo 'ti-pulakävali-raïjitäìgaù / premäçru-väridhim uväha
vilocanäbhyäm
kälena tävad acireëa samägato 'sau / çréväsa-veçmani çubhe
çuçubhe ca püte 6
viçvambharaù; ati-pulaka - thrill-bumps; ävali - rows; raïjita - delighting;
aìgaù - body; prema-açru - tears of love; väridhim - ocean; uväha - flowed;
vilocanäbhyäm - from His two eyes; kälena - time; tävat - that much; acireëa not long; samägataù - came; asau - He; çréväsa-veçmani - in the house of Çréväsa;
çubhe - auspicious; çuçubhe - He shone; ca - and; püte - in pure.

[p.262]
Viçvambhara's body erupted with rows of pulakas and His teardrops flowed in
rivulets forming lakes of prema. After a short time passed, He strolled, radiating
effulgence to the bright and sanctified residence of Paëita Çréväsa.

tatraiva sarvva-bhuvanaika-sukhäbhiläé / premäçru-pürëa-vadanaù
çuçubhe 'vadhütaù
dövä harer atitarä bhuvi durlabhäìga / tejo-maya kamala-netram
udära-veçam 7
tatra - there; eva - indeed; sarva-bhuvana - all worlds; eka-sukha - only
happiness; abhiläé - desirer; prema - love; açru-pürëa - full of tears; vadanaù face; çuçubhe - He shone; avadhütaù - aloof from social constraints; dövä - having
seen; hareù - of Hari; atitaräm - extremely; bhuvi - on earth; durlabha - rare;
aìgam - body; teja-mayam - powerful; kamala-netram - lotus eyes; udära-veçam noble appearance.
There shone the avadhüta, Ihis face covered by tears of prema. His heart burned a
single desire that all the people of the worlds should taste the bliss of Kåñëa-bhakti.
Then he saw the six-armed form of Çré Hari, which is very rarely seen on this earth,
which is filled with inconceivable potencies, which is endowed with two eyes
blossoming like lotuses, and a presence filled with munificence.
kake gadä-vara-rathäìga-dara dadhäna / väme su-veëu-vara-çärìga-sahasra-patram
pradhmäta-kaïcana-ruci vara-kaustubhädya / divya-sphuran-makara-kuëòala-gaëòayugmam 8

kake - on the (right) side; gadä-vara - fine club; ratha-aìga - a discus; daram a conchshell; dadhänam - holding; väme - on the left; su-veëu - a sweet flute;
vara-çärìga - a fine bow; sahasra-patram - a thousand-petalled lotus flower;
pradhmäta - molten; kaïcana-rucim - gold splendor; vara-kaustubha - beautiful
Kaustubha gem; ädyam - original; divya-sphurat - divine sparkling; makarakuëòala - shark-shaped earrings; gaëòa - cheeks; yugmam - pair.
His right three hands held a splendid club, a cakra, and a conch, and His left three

[p.263]
hands held an excellent flute, a beautiful bow, and a thousand-petalled lotus. His
form, which had the luster of molten golden, was further enriched by the effulgent
Kaustubha gem on His chest, and around His cheeks swung divinely dazzling sharkshaped earrings.

bhälollasan-maëi-vara vara-kaëöha-sastha- / nélämbujäbharaëamärakatäka-häram
raupyopaklipta-sita-hära-viräjamäna / süryyäçu-gaura-vasana
vivaço babhüva 9
bhäla-ullasat - shining forehead; maëi-varam - lovely jewel; vara-kaëöha beautiful neck; sastha - situated; néla-ambuja - blue lotus; äbharaëa ornaments; märakata - emeralds; aka - crystals; häram - necklace; raupya silver; upaklipta - adapted; sita - white; hära - necklace; viräjamäna - shining;
süryya-açu - sun-rays; gaura-vasanam - golden garment; vivaçaù - helpless;
babhüva - He became.
Shining on His forehead was a lovely jewel. Around His graceful neck swung a
garland of blue lotuses and a necklace of emeralds set in shining white silver. His
golden dhoté glittered with the rays of the sun. Seeing all this, Nityänanda Prabhu
was helplessly attracted.

dövä punar muralikä-varaëäìga-héna / rüpa tathaiva vara-bähucatuöaya saù
haräplutaù kaëam atha dvi-bhuja dadarça / lokänurüpa-carita ca
tato jahäsa 10
dövä - having seen; punaù - again; muralikä - flute; varaëa - embracing; aìgahénam - Cupid; rüpam - form; tathä - also; eva - surely; vara - beautiful; bähucatuöayam - with four arms; saù - He; hara-äplutaù - overcome by joy; kaëam - a
moment; atha - then; dvi-bhujam - two-armed; dadarça - He saw; loka-anurüpa suitable for the people; caritam - character; ca - and; tataù - then; jahäsa - He
laughed.

[p.264]
Then Nityänanda beheld a form of Kåñëa as the divine Kämadeva absorbed in
playing enchanting melodies upon His muralé, then the excellent four-armed form
of Çré Viñëu, and a moment later, He saw Gaura Hari's two-armed form, which is
just suitable for the people of this age. His heart flooded with gladness and Nitäé
laughed for joy.

eva harer atitarä divi durllabha yat / dövä sva-rüpam acireëa
nanartta so 'pi
äliìgya tatra sva-janän nava-toya-räçau / magno babhüva nitaräm
avadhüta-devaù 11
evam - thus; hareù - of Hari; atitaräm - exceedingly; divi - in heaven;
durlabham - rare; yat - which; dövä - seeing; sva-rüpam - original form; acireëa instantly; nanarta - He danced; saù - He; api - verily; äliìgya - embracing; tatra there; sva-janän - His men; nava-toya-räçau - in a flood of fresh tears; magnaù immersed; babhüva - He became; nitaräm - intensely; avadhüta-devaù - the Lord
who is aloof from social convention.
Thus seeing this original form of Çré Hari, which is very difficult to perceive even
for the residents of heaven, the avadhüta Lord at once began to dance. Embracing
His associates, He became drenched with a fresh shower of tears.

aööäööa-häsa-vara-çobhita-gaëòa-yugmo / väruëya-päna-madaçobhita-locana-çréù
nélämbaro muala-läìgala-vetra-dhäré / këägrajo jayati gaurarasena pürëaù 12
aööäööa - extremely loud; häsa - laughter; vara-çobhita - very beautiful; gaëòayugmaù - both His cheeks; väruëya - the varuëé beverage; päna - drinking; mada intoxicated; çobhita - beautified; locana - eyes; çréù - radiant; néla-ambaraù wearing a blue garment; muala - club; läìgala - plow; vetra-dhäré - staff-holder;
këa-agrajaù - the elder brother of Kåñëa; jayati - glories!; gaura-rasena - by the

[p.265]
mellows of Gaura; pürëaù - filled.
His two cheeks became beautified as He laughed long and loudly, and due to
drinking the varuëé beverage His radiant eyes became intoxicated. He wore a
garment of a deep-blue hue, and He held a plow, a club, and a rod for driving cows.
All glories to Balaräma, Kåñëa's elder brother as He overflows with Gaura-rasa!

çréväsa-rämau ca bhiçaì-muräri / näräyaëa präha prabhur vrajasva
advaita-väöyäm avadhüta ea / gamiyati jïäpayitu dvijendram 13
çréväsa-rämau - the brothers; ca - and; bhiçak - physician; murärim - Muräri
Gupta; näräyaëam - Näräyaëa; präha - He said; prabhuù - the master; vrajasva please go; advaita-vätyäm - to the house of Advaita; avadhüta - free from social
convention; eaù - this; gamiyati - He should come; jïäpayitum - to inform; dvijaindram - best of brähmaëas.
Prabhu addressed Çréväsa, Räma, the physician Muräri, and Näräyaëa, "Go now to
Çré Advaita's residence and inform that best of brähmaëas that Nityänanda-avadhüta
is here and that he should come to meet with him."

ittha samäkarëya harer giras te / jagmur mudädvaita-padäravindam
gatvä praëemur dyu-nadé-taöe çubhe / äjïä harer ähur anantapuëyäm 14
ittham - thus; samäkarëya - hearing; hareù - of Hari; giraù - the words; te they; jagmuù - went; mudä - with joy; advaita-pada-aravindam - to the lotus feet
of Advaita; gatvä - having gone; praëemuù - they bowed down; dyu-nadé-taöe on the bank of the Gaìgä; çubhe - beautiful; äjïäm - the order; hareù - of Hari;
ähuù - they told; ananta-puëyäm - unlimited pious benefit.
Hearing Çré Hari's words the bhaktas set out feeling glad to have the chance to see
Advaita's lotus feet. When they arrived in Çäntipura on the beautiful bank of the skyborn river, they bowed down to Advaita and told Him of their order from Çré Hari,
which awards unlimited purificatory benefit.

[p.266]
çrutvä prabhor adbhuta-véryyam ujjvalam / mumoda hareëa jagau
nanartta ca
äcäryya änanda-mahämbudhau muhur / nimajjanonmajjanam
ätatäna 15
çrutvä - having heard; prabhoù - from Prabhu; adbhuta-véryam - the amazing
power; ujjvalam - brilliant; mumoda - He took pleasure; hareëa - with joy; jagau He sang; nanarta - danced; ca - and; äcärya; änanda-mahä-ambudhau - in the
great ocean of bliss; muhuù - repeatedly; nimajjana-unmajjanam - diving and
surfacing; ätatäna - He penetrated.
The _cärya was thrilled and delighted to hear of the astonishing power of Gaura
Prabhu. Beginning to sing and dance, he plunged into a vast ocean of joy, and
repeatedly dove and surfaced in that ocean.

sthitvä tatas tatra dina-dvaya te / dhyätvä padäbja sva-gha saméyuù
äcäryya-mukhyäç ca hareù padäbje / nivedya sarvva sahasä
nananduù 16
sthitvä - situated; tataù - then; tatra - there; dina-dvayam - for two days; te they; dhyätvä - having desired; pada-abjam - lotus feet; sva-gham - His home;
saméyuù - they went; äcärya-mukhyäù - headed by the _cärya; ca - and; hareù of Hari; pada-abje - at the lotus feet; nivedya - offering; sarvam - all; sahasä immediately; nananduù - rejoiced.
Having rested for two days in Çäntipura, they felt a hankering to see Gauräìga's
lotus feet, and led by the _cärya, the bhaktas set forth for their lord's home in
Navadvépa. Then, sitting at the lotus feet of Gaura Hari they at once told Him all
that had happened to them.

äcäryya ägatya tataù pare çubhe / käle dadarçämbuja-patra-netram
dövä mukha siha-ninäda-yuktaù / präpa prapannärtti-hara

[p.267]
mukundam 17
äcäryaù - Çré Advaita; ägatya - having arrived; tataù - then; pare - supreme;
çubhe - auspicious; käle - at the time; dadarça - He saw; ambuja-patra-netram eyes like the lotus petal; dövä - having seen; mukham - face; siha-ninäda - sound
of a lion; yuktaù - possessed of; präpa - He attained; prapanna - surrendered; arti
- pains; haram - taking away; mukundam - the giver of liberation.
At an all-auspicious moment the _cärya arrived and thus he beheld that face whose
eyes are shaped like the elongated petals of the lotus. Seeing that, Advaita roared
like a lion havimg attained the shelter of Mukunda, who removes affliction from the
heart of a surrendered soul.

çréväsa-devälaya-madhya-go harir / vvaräsana-sthaù sahasä raräja
santapta-cämé-kara-rociä ravir / yathä prabhäte nayanänuraïjanaù
18
çréväsa - of Çrévasa; deva-älaya - place of God (temple); madhya-gaù - gone in
the midst; hariù - the remover of sin; vara-äsana - fine seat; sthaù - situated;
sahasä - suddenly; raräja - He shone; santapta-cämé - molten gold; kara - rays;
rociä - with the luster; raviù - the sun; yathä - as; prabhäte - in the dawn;
nayana - eyes; anuraïjanaù - delighting.
Seated on a fine seat in the heart of Çréväsa häkura's temple, suddenly Çré Hari
shone with effulgent golden rays like the dawning sun delighting the eyes of all.

dövänanendu muditä mahänta / äcäryya-mukhyä jagur ärdra-cittäù
naivedyam arghya ca dadur varäçukän / nemuù pthivyä vinipatya
haritäù 19
dövä - seeing; änana - face; indum - moon; muditäù - joyous; mahäntaù - great
souls; äcärya-mukhyäù - headed by the _cärya; jaguù - they sang; ärdra-cittäù with melted hearts; naivedyam - foodstuffs; arghyam - valuable presentations; ca

[p.268]
- and; daduù - they gave; vara-açukän - fine cloths; nemuù - they bowed down;
pthivyäm - on the earth; vinipatya - falling down; haritäù - thrilled.
Seeing that moon-like face, their hearts melted with joy and headed by the _cärya,
the great souls began to sing. They presented Lord Gaura with nicely prepared
foods, valuable gifts and fine clothing, and fell before Him on the earth bowing in
jubilation.

püjä ghétvä bhagavän dvijänä / sabhujya teä sahasä prasädam
tebhyo mudädäd vasana su-mälya / te tad ghétvätitarä nanarttuù 20
püjäm - worship; ghétvä - accepting; bhagavän - the Lord; dvijänäm - of the
brähmaëas; sabhujya - enjoying; teäm - amongst them; sahasä - at once;
prasädam - mercy; tebhyaù - to them; mudä - with joy; adät - He gave; vasanam garments; su-mälyam - nice garlands; te - they; tat - that; ghétvä - taking;
atitaräm - very much; nanartuù - they danced.
Accepting that worship, the illustrious Lord took pleasure in their association, at
once blissfully returned those garments and exquisite garlands as prasädam. to
them. Accepting that mercy, the devotees began to sing and dance in great bliss.

te 'ti-prahöäù pulakäcitäìgä / änanda-ratnäkara-magna-cittäù
ätmänam anya ca vidur gatäçubha / kaivalyam apy alpatara
pracakru 21
te - they; ati-prahöäù - very jubilant; pulaka - thrill-bumps; acita - expanded;
aìgäù - bodies; änanda - joy; ratna-äkara - origin of jewels (ocean); magna merged; cittäù - consciousness; ätmänam - self; anyam - other; ca - and; viduù they know; gata-açubham - inauspiciousness gone; kaivalyam - oneness; api also; alpataram - insignificant; pracakruù - they made.
Saturated with immense bliss their bodies became covered by pulakas. Their
consciousness was drowned in the jewel-churning ocean of bliss, and they felt no
separation between themselves and others. Thus all inauspiciousness was dispelled,

[p.269]
and the devotees considered the happiness of kaivalya to be insignificant.

rätrin-diva te na viduù sukhena / süryodaye ntya-parä dinäntam
ninyur niçä tä ca punaù prabhäte / ntyävasäne jagadéçvaräjïayä 22
ägatya gehe dvija-varyya-sattamä / bhiaktamädyä hari-nämabhäaëäù
strébhyaç ca sarvve jagadur mmudänvitä / hareç caritra nikhila
jagad-guroù 23
rätrin-divam - night and day; te - they; na - not; viduù - they knew; sukhena due to happiness; sürya-udaye - at the rising of the sun; ntya-paräù - absorbed in
dancing; dina-antam - the end of day; ninyuù - they passed; niçäm - night; täm her; ca - and; punaù - again; prabhäte - at dawn; ntya-avasäne - at the end of
dancing; jagat-éçvara - the Lord of all sentient beings; äjïayä - by the order;
ägatya - coming; gehe - in the home; dvija-varya-sattamäù - the exalted chiefs of
the twice-born; bhiaktama-ädyäù - headed by the best of physicians; hari-nämabhäaëäù - uttering the names of Hari; strébhyaù - to the women; ca - and; sarve all; jagaduù - told; mudä-anvitäù - filled with joy; hareù - of Hari; caritram behavior; nikhilam - fully; jagat-guroù - of the guru of the material world.
Absorbed from dawn 'til dusk in singing and dancing, they then embraced the
night. Out of joy they had become unaware of the passing of day and night. But at
dawn, by the order of Gaura Jagadéçvara, and led by the best of physicians,
Mukunda Datta, those eminent chiefs of the twice-born, returned home vibrating
hari-näma. They all joyously described in full to their women-folk the behavior of
Çré Hari, who had appeared as a guru to uplift the souls of this world of darkness.

Thus ends the Ninth Sarga entitled "The Lord Accepts the Worship of His
Devotees," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *

[p.270]
Tenth Sarga
ntya-viläsaù
Pastimes of Dance

snätvä dyu-nadyä jagad-éça-püjä / ktvä saméyuù punar eva
sannidhau
viçvambharasyämbuja-locanasya / so 'pi pramodena dadarça tän
prabhuù 1
snätvä - having bathed; dyu-nadyäm - in the sky-river (Gaìgä); jagat-éça - Lord
of the universe; püjä - worship; ktvä - made; saméyuù - they went together;
punaù - again; eva - to be sure; sannidhau - in the presence; viçvambharasya - of
Viçvambhara; ambuja-locanasya - who has lotus eyes; saù api - that very person;
pramodena - with great delight; dadarça - saw; tän - them; prabhuù - the Master.
After bathing within the sky-Gaìgä and performing the daily püjä of their Deity
forms of the Lord of the universe, all of the bhaktas returned to the presence of the
lotus-eyed Viçvambhara, who glanced over them with much delight.

tataù para çré-hari-däsam uttama / çré-këa-pädämbuja-matta-ñaöpadam
su-çétala sädhu-vilocanotsava / navodgatendu-pratima su-maìgalam
2
dövä samäliìgya bhuja-dvayena / dòha haris ta nija-päda-bhaktam
samädideçäsanam ugra-kértis / tasmai punas ta praëanäma so 'pi 3
tataù param - thereafter; çré-hari-däsam - the exemplary teacher of the
chanting of the mahä-mantra; uttamam - transcendental; çré-këa - all-attractive;
päda-ambuja - lotus feet; matta - maddened; ñaö-padam - having six feet (a bee);

[p.271]
su-çétalam - very cooling, completely free from passion; sädhu-vilocana - the
eyes of saints; utsavam - festival; nava-udgata - newly arisen; indu - moon;
pratimam - likeness; su-maìgalam - very auspicious; dövä - upon seeing;
samäliìgya - embracing; bhuja-dvayena - with His two arms; dòham - firmly;
hariù - the remover of sin; tam - him; nija-päda - of His feet; bhaktam - devotee;
samädideça - directed; äsanam - seat; ugra-kértiù - terrible fame; tasmai - to him;
punaù - further; tam - him; praëanäma - He bowed down; saù api - that very
person.
Thereafter, Çré Hari firmly embraced within His two beautiful arms the
transcendental bhakta, Çré Haridäsa, who resembled an intoxicated bee at Çré
Kåñëa's lotus feet. His presence was fully free of passion, and was very cooling like
the newly arisen, sublimely auspicious full moon. Indeed, his very sight created a
festival for the eyes of sädhus. The Lord, whose fame is terrible (to the wrongdoers),
led Haridäsa to a seat, and in addition that very same Supreme Person offered
obeisances to him.

ta candanenäçu vilepayitvä / mälya ca dattvätha mahä-prasädam
anna rasair yukta anuttama dadau / catuù-prakära bubhuje tadäjïayä 4
tam - him; candanena - with sandal-pulp; äçu - swiftly; vilepayitvä - anointed;
mälyam - garland; ca - and; dattvä - gave; atha - then; mahä-prasädam - food
offered to the Deity; annam - foods; rasaiù - with flavors; yuktam - possessed of;
anuttamam - unsurpassed; dadau - He offered; catuù-prakäram - of four kinds;
bubhuje - he ate; tat-äjïayä - by the Lord's order.
Quickly He anointed Haridäsa's brow with the pulp of sandal, placed a flower
garland round his neck, and offered him mahä-prasäda. That food was of four kinds,
of excellent quality, filled with flavor. By the Lord's order Haridäsa ate those foods.

so 'pi prasannendu-mukhaù sukhoito / harer ghe räjati devavat
sudhéù
gäyan harer kérttana-maìgala muhur / mumoda nityätma-sukhena

[p.272]
dhéraù 5
saù api - that very person; prasanna - tranquil; indu-mukhaù - face like the
moon; sukha-uitaù - comfortably seated; hareù - of Hari; ghe - in the home; räjati
- he shone; deva-vat - like a god; su-dhéù - having refined intelligence; gäyan singing; hareù - of Hari; kértana-maìgalam - auspicious descriptions; muhuù again; mumoda - he rejoiced; nitya-ätma - of the eternal soul; sukhena - by the
happiness; dhéraù - sober.
That sober person whose countenance was tranquil like the moon, shone with
divine qualities. Sitting peacefully in Gauräìga's home, he ceaselessly sang bhajanas
depicting the sublime qualities of Çré Hari, and rejoiced in the eternal happiness of
the ätmä.

tenaiva särddha bhagavän anädiù / kréòä tathäcäryya-sama vidhäya
sapreayäm äsa nijälaya tam / advaita-siho 'pi jagäma höaù 6
tena - with him; eva - certainly; särdham - in company; bhagavän - the Lord;
anädiù - beginningless; kréòäm - sports; tathä - also; äcärya-samam - with the
äcärya; vidhäya - performed; sapreayäm äsa - He sent; nija-älayam - own abode;
tam - him; advaita-sihaù - the lion of Advaita; api - also; jagäma - he went; höaù jubilant.
The illustrious Gaura and the _cärya took pleasure in the company of Haridäsa and
sent him back to his home. Then the lion-like Advaita also departed in jubilation.

tato 'vadhüta vinayena dhéro / gacchann anuvrajya su-düram éçaù
uväca kaupénaka-celam eka / dehi tvam ebhyo dvija-sajjanebhyaù 7
tataù - then; avadhütam - aloof from social restrictions; vinayena - with
humility; dhéraù - sober; gacchan - going; anuvrajya - following; su-düram - very
far; éçaù - the Lord; uväca - He said; kaupénaka-celam - cloth for undergarments;
ekam - one; dehi - you should give; tvam - you; ebhyaù - to them; dvija-

[p.273]
sajjanebhyaù - for the benefit of the saintly brähmaëas.
When the avadhüta was leaving Lord Gaura followed him for a long way. Then He
humbly and soberly addressed Nityänanda, "Please give Me just one kaupéna for the
benefit of the saintly brähmaëas."

dadau tadä tad-vacanecchayä sa / kaupénam eka tad asau ghétvä
svaya prabhur bhtya-janäya cela / dadau vibhajya pratighya te
mudä 8
dadau - He gave; tadä - then; tat-vacana - His words; icchayä - by the desire;
saù - He; kaupénam - underwear; ekam - one; tat - that; asau - He; ghétvä - took;
svayam - personally; prabhuù - Master; bhtya-janäya - to the servant; celam cloth; dadau - He gave; vibhajya - dividing; pratighya - accepted; te - they; mudä happily.
In accordance with his request, Nityänanda gave Him a kaupéna and
Prabhuaccepted that. He personally divided that cloth into smaller pieces and
distributed them to His servants, who eagerly joyously received them.

vidhäya maulau n-hareù prasäda / këena särddha nijam eva
mandiram
ägatya te prema-vibhinna-dhairyä / nipatya bhümau ruruduù suduùkhitäù 9
vidhäya - tying; maulau - on the çikhä; n-hareù - of Lord Hari in a human
form; prasädam - mercy; këena - with Kåñëa; särdham - in company; nijam own; eva - indeed; mandiram - home; ägatya - coming; te - they; prema-vibhinnadhairyäù - sobriety fractured by love; nipatya - falling; bhümau - on the ground;
ruruduù - they wept; su-duùkhitäù - very unhappy.
Tying this prasädam from Nåhari on their çikhäs they accompanied him in
chanting Çré Näma while He returned home. Then due to the arousal of prema, their

[p.274]
composure was broken and they fell weeping sorrowfully on the ground.

tato nimajyämbhasi bhümi-deväù / snätvä dyu-nadyä hari-püjanakriyäm
cakruù punaù säyam upägatäs te / vijahrur äryä hariëä sama jaguù
10
tataù - then; nimajya - immersing; ambhasi - in the water; bhümi-deväù - the
earth-gods (brähmaëas); snätvä - after bathing; dyu-nadyäm - in the sky-born
river; hari-püjana-kriyäm - worship of Hari; cakruù - they made; punaù - again;
säyam - evening; upägatäù - arrived; te - they; vijahruù - they enjoyed; äryäù noble souls; hariëä - with Hari; samam - in company; jaguù - they sang.
Then those brähmaëas bathed, in the sky-Gaìgä, immersing themselves in her
flowing waters, and all of them performed their daily worship of Çré Hari. As dusk
came, they approached Navadvépa, and those noble souls again delighted in singing
with Gaura Hari.

äliìgya bhtyän api tän ghétvä / bhümau luöhaty abja-kara-dvayena
änandam aty-artham ananta-kértiù / samudvahan siha-gatir nanarta
11
äliìgya - embracing; bhtyän - His servants; api - also; tän - them; ghétvä holding; bhümau - on the earth; luöhati - He rolls about; abja-kara-dvayena with His two lotus hands; änandam - bliss; ati-artham - excessive; ananta-kértiù who has limitless fame; samudvahan - brought out; siha-gatiù - a lion's gait;
nanarta - He danced.
With His two lotus hands Gauräìga tightly clasped His servants and embracing
them rolled about upon the earth. Then He whose fame is expanded within limitless
hearts and worlds, displayed intense änanda, as he danced with the gait of a lion.

çréväsam ädäya bhuja-dvayena / tan-madhyato düratara ninäya

[p.275]
tato na dövä vivaçä babhüvuù / su-vismitäs te hari-däsa-varyyäù 12
çréväsam - the pure devotee; ädäya - seizing; bhuja-dvayena - with His two
arms; tat-madhyataù - from the midst of them; dürataram - very far; ninäya taking; tataù - then; na - not; dövä - seeing; vivaçäù - helpless; babhüvuù - they
became; su-vismitäù - very mystified; te - they; hari-däsa-varyäù - excellent
servants of Hari.
Then seizing Çréväsa from their midst, Gauräìga took him far away from there.
Being unable to see Him, those dear servants of Hari felt very helpless and confused.

vicäryya te no dadçur mahäntaù / kubdhän viditvä tad ajaù
samägataù
svaya sva-tanträrtha-rataù purastät / te pärçvatas ta parivavrur
utsukäù 13
vicärya - searching; te - they; na u - not indeed; dadçuù - they saw; mahäntaù the great souls; kubdhän - agitated; viditvä - knowing; tat - that; ajaù - the
unborn; samägataù - arrived; svayam - by his own desire; sva-tantra-artha independent ways; rataù - attached; purastät - present before Him; te - they;
pärçvataù - by His side; tam - Him; parivavruù - they were surrounding; utsukäù anxious.
Although those great souls searched in every quarter, they could not find Him.
Then the independent unborn Lord, understanding their anxiety, reappeared by His
own sweet will. They anxiously gathered around Him, some standing in front of
Him and others by His side.

gopé-svabhäväpta-samasta-bhaktyä / paçyaç ca këa vana-mälina
prabhum
mad-vallabho 'sau bhagavän yathä bhavet / tathä kpä me kurutä
maheçvaraù 14

[p.276]
gopé-svabhäva - the moods of the gopés; äpta - attained; samasta-bhaktyä - by
full absorption in devotion; paçyan - seeing; ca - and; këam - the all-attractive
Lord; vana-mälinam - the forest-garlanded one; prabhum - Master; mat-vallabhaù
- my lover; asau - He; bhagavän - the splendid Lord; yathä - as; bhavet - He may
be; tathä - so; kpäm - mercy; me - on me; kurutäm - He must do; mahä-éçvaraù the great controller.
By their full absorption in bhakti, they had attained the ecstatic moods experienced
by the gopés, and they saw GauraKëa as the gopés had seen Vanamälé-Kåñëa in Çré
Våndävana. Thus each of them prayed, "Oh! May the Lord show His mercy to me
and become my lover!"

gopäìganä-bhäva-vibhäva-niöhaù / çré-këa evätra rasena pürëaù
gopa-stré-bhävän praëatän vibhävya / karoti vasträharaëädi-léläm
15
gopa-aìganä - the wives of the cowherds; bhäva - ecstasy; vibhäva awakening; niöhaù - determined; çré-këaù - the all-attractive; eva - surely; atra here; rasena - with mellows; pürëaù - filled; gopa-stré - the women of the
cowherds; bhävän - moods; praëatän - surrendered; vibhävya - perceiving; karoti
- He performs; vastra-äharaëa - the stealing of the garments; ädi - headed by;
léläm - pastimes.
Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, who is the embodiment of all rasa, had a special determination
in His avatära. That was to awaken in the hearts of the jévas the ecstatic bhäva felt
by the wives of the cowherds of Vraja. So when He perceived that these surrendered
souls had attained the same mood felt by the wives of the gopas of Vrajabhümi. He
performed with them various léläs beginning with gopé-vastra-haraëa or stealing the
garments of the unmarried gopés.

tataù kadäcid rajané-mukhe sa / vasträn samäkya vinagna-bhävän
cakre karämbhoja-yugena cakré / bhtyän rasa-jïo rasa-do naräëäm
16

[p.277]
tataù - then; kadäcit - once; rajané-mukhe - at eventide; saù - He; vasträn garments, coverings of illusion; samäkya - He drew out; vinagna-bhävän - mood
of nudity; cakre - He made; kara-ambhoja-yugena - with His two lotus hands;
cakré - the wielder of the disc; bhtyän - servants; rasa-jïa - the adept of mellows;
rasa-daù - the giver of mellows; naräëäm - for men.
Thus once at dusk, that wielder of the cakra, who is the connoisseur of rasa, and
who bestowed the sublime science of rasa-tattva upon mankind, with His lotus
hands drew out from their hearts the consciousness of spiritual nudity in the form
of His servants' garments.

eva prabhuù kréòanaka sa ktvä / kaëäd dadau vastra-gaëän
samastän
tebhyaù punas te paridhäya höä / vasäsi säkam jahur muräriëä 17
evam - thus; prabhuù - the Master; kréòanakam - a play; saù - He; ktvä - made;
kaëät - after a moment; dadau - He gave; vastra-gaëän - the heap of garments;
samastän - all; tebhyaù - to them; punaù - again; te - they; paridhäya - put on;
höäù - thrilled; vasäsi - garments; säkam - with; jahuù - enjoyed; murä-ariëä with the slayer of the Murä demon.
In the same way as He had done as Våndävanacandra Këa, Çré Gaura Hari teased
them for some moments, and then returned all their garments to them. Feeling
much enlivened, the bhaktas put on those garments and delighted in the company of
the enemy of Mura.

gäyan harer näma punar nanartta / taiù särddham antaù-karaëair
yathärthaiù
lélä-gatir loka-mala kapan sa / santapta-cämékara-rociä prabhuù 18
gäyan - singing; hareù - of Hari; näma - the name; punaù - again; nanarta - He
danced; taiù - by them; särdham - accompanied; antaù-karaëaiù - by their
minds; yathä-arthaiù - as they desired; lélä-gatiù - the origin of all pleasure-

[p.278]
pastimes; loka-malam - the contamination of the people; kapan - cleansing; saù He; santapta-cämé-kara - rays of molten gold; rociä - with a luster; prabhuù - the
Master.
Singing the names of Hari, He danced with them in fulfillment of their hearts'
desire. Thus did our Prabhu, whose every movement is His pleasure-pastime, by His
luster of molten gold cleanse away contamination from the hearts of mankind.

tato 'vadhütaù punar ägataù sukha / reme nanarttäçu jagau harer
guëän
këena särddha halinä yathärbhakäù / purä tathaivätra ca
värijekaëaù 19
tataù - then; avadhütaù - one who is free from social conventions; punaù again; ägataù - came; sukham - happily; reme - he enjoyed; nanarta - he danced;
äçu - at once; jagau - he sang; hareù - of Hari; guëän - the qualities; këena - with
Gaura Kåñëa; särdham - in company; halinä - with the plow-wielder; yathä - as;
arbhakäù - boys; purä - before; tathä - so; eva - indeed; atra - now; ca - and;
värija-ékaëaù - lotus-eyes.
Then the avadhüta again happily returned and at once delighted in singing of the
qualities of Çré Hari and dancing. At that time, the bhaktas appeared to be the lotuseyed cowherd boys who of Vraja who formerly danced in the company of Kåñëa and
plow-wielding Balaräma

nåtyävasäne bhagavän dvijägryän / uväca pädäv avadhütakasya
prakalya ghëantu jala bhavantaç / cakrus tatas te çirasä tadäjïäm
20
pétvä tu pädodakam eva te mudä / ntyanti gäyanti rasena pürëäù
çré-gaura-candreëa sama vicukruçus / tato 'vadhütaç ca hasan
papäta 21

[p.279]
nåtya-avasäne - at the end of dancing; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; dvijaagryän - the chiefs of the brähmaëas; uväca - He said; pädau - the two feet;
avadhütakasya - of the avadhüta; prakalya - washing; ghëantu - they should
take; jalam - water; bhavantaù - your good selves; cakruù - they did; tataù - then;
te - they; çirasä - by the head; tat-äjïäm - His order; pétvä - drinking; tu - verily;
päda-udakam - foot wash; eva - certainly; te - they; mudä - happily; ntyanti - they
dance; gäyanti - they sing; rasena - by mellows; pürëäù - full; çré-gaura-candreëa with Çré Gaura Candra; samam - in company; vicukruçuù - they cried out; tataù then; avadhütaù - aloof from conventions; ca - and; hasan - laughing; papäta He fell.
When everyone had finished dancing, the all-opulent Lord instructed those noble
brähmaëas, "Dear sirs, wash the avadhüta's feet and drink the water." Accepting
Gaura's order on their heads, they joyously drank Nitäi's footwash. Then saturated
with Nityänanda-rasa, they danced, sang and loudly called out the names of Hari in
company with Çré Gaura Candra. Then the avadhüta tumbled to the ground
laughing.

tato nanandämta-pürakeëa / väcä ca gatyä hasitena cäpi
vilokanenämbuja-locanasya / dhunvan naräëä hdayogra-duùkham
22
tataù - then; nananda - enjoyed; amta-pürakeëa - filled with nectar; väcä - by
the words; ca - and; gatyä - by the movements; hasitena - by His laughter; ca and; api - also; vilokanena - by the glancing; ambuja-locanasya - of the lotuseyed; dhunvan - cleansing; naräëäm - of men; hdaya - heart; ugra - harsh;
duùkham - grievances.
Nityänanda delighted in the words, the movements, the laughter, and the glancing
of the lotus-eyed Gaura, all of which were overflowing with nectar. Through all
these attributes, Mahäprabhu cleanses the terrible sorrows which lurk in men's
hearts.

tathä ramanta tridaçä viditvä / nabho-gatä nemur amu su-veçam

[p.280]
su-vismitäù kérttanakais tu pürëäù / stutvämtäs te dadçuù prahöäù
23
tathä - also; ramantam - delighting; tri-daçäù - the 30 demigods; viditvä knowing; nabha-gatäù - situated in outer space; nemuù - bowed down; amum to Him; su-veçam - with His charming attire; vismitäù - astonished; kértanakaiù with songs; tu - indeed; pürëäù - complete; stutvä - having praised; amtäù - the
immortals; te - they; dadçuù - they saw; prahöäù - very joyous.
The thirty primary gods and their followers, recognizing the joyous presence of Çré
Çacé-nandana, bowed down to that Lord dressed in charming attire. Their mouths
filled with song as they acclaimed Him, and with great wonder, they gazed upon
Him in immense exultation.

taträgataù çré-hari-däsa-varyo / vakaù sthala-sphäöika-ratnacandraù
su-nüpurai raïjita-päda-yugmo / nanartta devasya samépato muniù
24
tatra - then; ägataù - approached; çré-hari-däsa-varyaù - the exalted Haridäsa;
vakaù - chest; sthala - mounds; sphäöika - crystals; ratna - jewel (tears); candraù moons; su-nüpuraiù - with sweet-sounding anklebells; raïjita-päda - delightful
reddish feet; yugmaù - pair; nanarta - he danced; devasya - of the Lord;
samépataù - in the presence of; muniù - the sage.
Then the glorious Haridäsa approached. The mounds of his chest were covered by
crystaline, jewel-like tears that shone like moons. In the Divine Lord's presence the
sage danced and sweet-sounding anklebells rang on his two reddish feet.

advaita-varyyaù punar ägataù su-dhéù / sa ta prabhur bhakta-janapriyo hariù
pädyärghya-gandhäkata-candanädibhiù / samarccayitvä tam
athädiçat svayam 25

[p.281]
advaita-varyaù - the eminent Advaita; punaù - further; ägataù - came; su-dhéù sagacious; saù - He; tam - Him; prabhuù - the Master; bhakta-jana-priyaù - who
holds dear the devotees; hariù - the remover of sin; pädya - footwash; arghya auspicious handwash; gandha - scents; akata - unbroken barley; candana sandalwood pulp; ädibhiù - headed by; samarcayitvä - having fully honored; tam
- Him; atha - then; adiçat - ushered; svayam - personally.
Afterwards the eminent and wise Advaita entered. Çré Gaura Hari, whose bhaktas
are the most dear of all dear things to His heart, then offered Advaita complete
worship together with footwash, handwash, fragrant oils, unhusked barleycorns,
sandalwood pulp and so forth, and then He personally showed Advaita to a seat.

sa sambhrameëädarato ghétvä / bhuktvä nadanta su-mahatprasädam
reme hareù särddham udära-kértir / äcäryya-varyo mahad-utsavena
26
saù - He; sambhrameëa - with great awe; ädarataù - with respect; ghétvä accepting; bhuktvä - having enjoyed; nadantam - roaring; su-mahat-prasädam very great mercy; reme - He enjoyed; hareù - of Hari; särdham - in company;
udära-kértiù - of widespread fame; äcärya-varyaù - the best of teachers; mahatutsavena - with great festivity.
Çré Advaita accepted that worship but maintained a demeanor of great respect
respect and reverence for Gaura throughout. Then releasing a thunderous roar, he
enjoyed a very great display of prasädam, Then that exalted and widely renowned
_cärya delighted in a great festival of kértana, with Gaura Hari.

çëoti yaù këa-kathäm imä çubhä / premänvitaù syät sa tu çuddhabhävam
labheta päëòityam akhaëòita ca / dehävasäne ca hareù pura vrajet
27

[p.282]
çëoti - he listens; yaù - who; këa-kathäm - narration of Kåñëa; imäm - this;
çubhäm - propitious; prema-anvitaù - filled by love; syät - it may be; saù - He; tu indeed; çuddha-bhävam - sanctified mood; labheta - he may attain; päëòityam wisdom; akhaëòitam - unfailing; ca - and; deha-avasäne - at the termination of
the body; ca - and; hareù - of Hari; puram - abode; vrajet - he can go.
Any person who hears with love the sublime narration of Kåñëa Caitanya attains
pure consciousness, unfailing wisdom, and enters the abode of Hari at the end of his
material body.

Thus ends the Tenth Sarga entitled "Pastimes of Dance," in the Second
Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eleventh Sarga
jähnavé-pätanam
The Lord Throws Himself in the River Jähnavé

bhikuù kaçcid vanamälé / dvijas tatra samägataù
sa-putro deva-deveça / dadarça ca nanartta ca 1
bhikuù - mendicant; kaçcit - a certain; vanamälé - named Vanamälé; dvijaù - a
brähmaëa; tatra - there; samägataù - arrived; sa-putraù - with his son; deva-deva of Viñëu; éçam - the Lord; dadarça - he saw; ca - and; nanarta - he danced; ca and.
Once a certain mendicant brähmaëa named Vanamälé arrived there at the house of
Çréväsa with his son. When he saw Gauräìga Mahäprabhu, who is the supreme
master of even Lord Viñëu, he began to dance.

[p.283]
ta dövä bhagavän prétyä / tena särddha hari jagau
hareù so 'pi prasädena / sa-putro mumude sukham 2
tam - him; dövä - seeing; bhagavän - the splendrous Lord; prétyä - with love;
tena - with him; särdham - together; harim; jagau - He sang; hareù - of Hari; saù
api - that very person; prasädena - by the mercy; sa-putraù - with his son;
mumude - rejoiced; sukham - happily.
The all-opulent Lord glanced lovingly upon him and sang with him the names of
Hari. Thus by the mercy of Gaura Hari that brähmaëa and his son happily tasted
delight.

ekadä kérttana-pare / harau ntyati sa dvijaù
dadarça bälaka kaïcit / çyäma pétäbarävtam 3
ekadä - once; kértana-pare - absorbed in kértana; harau - of Hari; ntyati - he
danced; saù - he; dvijaù - the brähmaëa; dadarça - saw; bälakam - boy; kaïcit some; çyämam - blue-blackish; péta-ambara - yellow dress; avtam - covered.
One day while the brähmaëa was dancing, fully absorbed in hari-kértana, he
suddenly saw some boy, whose complexion was a lustrous blue-blackish hue
dressed in yellow cloth.

dröo döo mayä deva / iti höo babhüva ha
sa janma särthaka mene / bhiku-dharmo dvijottamaù 4
döaù - seen; döaù - seen; mayä - by Me; devaù - the Divine Lord; iti - thus; höaù thrilled; babhüva - he became; ha - indeed; saù - he; janma - birth; sa-arthakam with purpose; mene - considered; bhiku-dharmaù - whose subsistence was
begging; dvija-uttamaù - elevated brähmaëa.
"I have seen! I have seen!" He cried out. Thus that elevated brähmaëa who lived by

[p.284]
begging became jubilant, considering that his life was now fulfilled.

putra ghétvä hastäbhyäm / ägataù prabhu-sannidhim
eva bhikuù sa höäìga / pulakävalim udvahan 5
premäçru-dhärä-siktäìgo / nanartta saha cakriëä
ekadä paitka karmma / ktvä çréväsa-paëditaù 6
putram - son; ghétvä - taking; hastäbhyäm - by the hands; ägataù - came;
prabhu-sannidhim - to the vicinity of the Master; evam - thus; bhikuù - beggar;
saù - he; höa-aìgaù - thrilled body; pulaka-avalim - lines of thrilled hairs;
udvahan - bearing; prema-açru - tears of love; dhärä - currents; sikta - sprinkled;
aìgaù - body; nanarta - he danced; saha - in company; cakriëä - with the holder
of the disc; ekadä - once; paitkam - of his father; karma - function; ktvä performed; çréväsa-paëditaù.
That mendicant came before the Master, holding his son by the hand. His whole
body became transcendentally enlivened, his hairs ecstatically stood erect in rows
and His body was wet with streams of prema-tears as he danced with the wielder of
the cakra
On another day, Çréväsa Paëita performed a ceremony to honor his departed father.

çëvan bhat sahasra sa / näma këasya çuddha-dhéù
taträjagäma bhagavän / çrutvä ca hari-nämakam 7
çëvan - hearing; bhat - great; sahasram - thousand; saù - He; näma - names;
këasya - of Kåñëa; çuddha-dhéù - of pure mind; tatra - there; äjagäma - came;
bhagavän; çrutvä - having heard; ca - and; hari-nämakam - the chanting of Hari's
names.
While the pure-minded Çréväsa heard the recitation of the great thousand names of
Çré Kåñëa, Bhagavän Çré Gauräìga arrived at that spot and also listened to harinäma.

[p.285]
nsihäveça-saìkruddho / gadäm ädäya sa-tvaraù
dhävati sma tato devo / nsihäkära-vikramaù 8
nsiha - man-lion avatära; äveça - overwhelmed; saìkruddhaù - filled with
anger; gadäm - club; ädäya - taking up; sa-tvaraù - quickly; dhävati - He runs;
sma - past; tataù - then; devaù - the Lord; n-siha - man-lion; äkära - the
appearance; vikramaù - prowess.
When Lord Gaura heard Nåsiha's name He became possessed with great rage and,
seizing a club, He ran, exhibiting the appearance and prowess of the Man-lion
incarnation.

eva bhüta ca ta deva / dövä sarvve pradudruvuù
paläyan aparän dövä / tatas tän nhariù punaù 9
evam - thus; bhütam - condition; ca - and; tam - Him; devam - the Divine Lord;
dövä - seeing; sarve - all; pradudruvuù - they fled; paläyan - causing to flee;
aparän - the others; dövä - seeing; tataù - then; tän - them; n-hariù - the humanlike Lord; punaù - again.
When all the people saw the Divine Lord in this condition, they fearfully ran away.
Observing that the residents of Navadvépa were fleeing, after a moment He again
resumed His human-like form.

kaëäd gadä parityajya / sustha äviçad äsane
tadoväca na jäne 'ham / aparädhaù kvacin mama 10
kaëät - after a moment; gadäm - the club; parityajya - abandoned; su-sthaù very well; äviçat - sat; äsane - on a seat; tadä - then; uväca - He said; na - not;
jäne - I know; aham - I; aparädhaù - offense; kvacit - some; mama - My.
He returned to His normal state and put down the club. Taking a seat, He said, "I
do not know whether I have commited some offense."

[p.286]
bhaved iti vacaù çrutvä / sarvve procur na te kvacit
aparädho jagannätha / yad darçanam anusmaran 11
päpa-béja dahed eva / nara-sihäkteù prabhoù
aparädhas tava bhavet / kadäcid api mänada 12
bhavet - it may be; iti - thus; vacaù - words; çrutvä - hearing; sarve - everyone;
procuù - declared; na - not; te - Your; kvacit - any; aparädhaù - offense;
jagannätha - O Lord of the universe; yat - which; darçanam - sight; anusmaran remembering; päpa-béjam - the seeds of sin; dahet - it can burn; eva - surely;
nara-siha-äkteù - of the appearance of Narasiha; prabhoù - of the Lord;
aparädhaù - offense; tava - Your; bhavet - it can be; kadäcit - at some time; api even; mäna-da - O giver of honor.
Hearing these words, everyone declared, "You have not committed an offense, O
Lord of the universe! Indeed, if someone simply remembers Your appearance as
Narasiha at any time, all the seeds of his sinful life become burned up. Your nature
is to offer respect to all others and accept none for Yourself. Thus how is it possible
that You can make an offence of any kind?"

athäpara-dine kaçcid / gäyanaù samupägataù
namasktya hari bhaktyä / tatropaviçya bhütale 13
atha - then; apara-dine - on the following day; kaçcit - some; gäyanaù - a
singer; samupägataù - approached; nama-ktya - bowed down; harim - to the
remover of sin; bhaktyä - with devotion; tatra - there; upaviçya - sitting; bhü-tale on the earth.
On the following day, a certain singer approached Gaura Hari, bowed to the Lord
with devotion, and then sat upon the ground.

jagau kala-pada géta / çivasya madhuräkaram

[p.287]
çrutvä sa bhagavän prétaù / çiväviöo nanartta ha 14
jagau - he sang; kala-padam - melodious verse; gétam - song; çivasya - of Çiva;
madhura - sweet; akaram - accents; çrutvä - hearing; saù - He; bhagavän; prétaù pleased; çiva-äviöaù - absorbed in the mood of Çiva; nanarta - danced; ha indeed.
He sang a verse about Çré Çiva in a melodious voice. Hearing that song, Gauräìga
became much engladdened. Absorbed in the mood of Çiva, He began to dance.

tata utthäya tarasä / gäyana-skhandam äruhat
çréväsa-paëòitas tatra / çiva-stotra cakära ha 15
tataù - then; utthäya - jumping up; tarasä - swiftly; gäyana-skhandam - the
shoulders of the singer; äruhat - He mounted; çréväsa-paëòitaù - the pure
devotee; tatra - then; çiva - to Lord Çiva; stotram - a hymn; cakära - he
composed; ha - indeed.
Then swiftly jumping up, Gaura mounted the singer's shoulders. Then Çréväsa
Paëita composed a stotram in praise of Çré Çiva.

mahoke sa haris tatra / vartulämbuja-locanaù
jaöilaù çìga-òamaru-vädako räma-gäyakaù 16
mahä-uke - on a large bull; saù - He; hariù - Çiva; tatra - there; vartula - whorl;
ambuja-locanaù - lotus-eyed; jaöilaù - matted hair; çìga - crescent moon; òamaru
- drum; vädakaù - musician; räma-gäyakaù - sings about Lord Räma.
"Lord Çiva, whose eyes resemble the whorls of lotuses, is seated on a great bull.
His hair is matted and the crescent moon rests upon his head. He plays upon the
òamaru drum and sings the praise of Çré Räma Candra.

babhüva jagatä näthaù / sarvva-deva-mayo haraù

[p.288]
cakre mahimnaù stotra sa / çré-mukundo 'ti-susvaraù
avaruhya tataù skandhäd / gäyanasyäviçad vibhuù
sarvve te muditäs tatra / hari-lélä-rasa-plutäù 17
babhüva - He became; jagatäm - of all the living beings; näthaù - lord; sarvadeva-mayaù - the sum total of all gods; haraù - the destroyer; cakre - he made;
mahimnaù - of glorification; stotram - hymn; saù - he; çré-mukundaù - the
physician; ati-su-svaraù - in a very sweet voice; avaruhya - descended; tataù then; skandhät - from his shoulders; gäyanasya - of the singer; aviçat - He sat
down; vibhuù - the all-pervasive Lord; sarve - all; te - they; muditäù - joyous;
tatra - there; hari-lélä - pastimes of Hari; rasa-plutäù - immersed in the mellows.
"Thus Hara, the destroyer is the lord of all worlds and living beings, In Hara is the
powers of all the devatäs." Mukunda sang this song in a very melodious voice. Then
the all-pervasive Lord descended from the shoulders of the singer and sat down. All
the bhaktas present became very jubilant and immersed in the mellows of Hari-lélä.

kurvanti kérttana harät / taiù sahaiva jagad-guruù
gäyan reme harer géta / nanartta ca muhur muhuù 18
çrémän viçvambharo devo / bhakti-bhäva-samanvitaù
tataù para-dine ntyävasäne daëòavat kitau 19
kurvanti - they performed; kértanam - chanting of Kåñëa's names; harät - due
to their joy; taiù - with them; saha - together; eva - indeed; jagat-guruù - the
spiritual teacher of the material worlds; gäyan - singing; reme - enjoyed; hareù of Hari; gétam - a song; nanarta - He danced; ca - and; muhuù muhuù repeatedly; çrémän - fortunate; viçvambharaù - maintainer of the cosmos; devaù Divine Lord; bhakti-bhäva-samanvitaù - imbued with devotional mood; tataù then; para-dine - on the next day; ntya-avasäne - at the end of dancing; daëòavat
- bowing flat like a stick; kitau - on the earth.

[p.289]
Out of gladness they performed kértana and the guru of the three worlds,
Viçvambhara-deva His heart filled with bhakti-bhäva, rejoiced in their company,
dancing more and more, singing songs of Çré Hari. Then on the next day, the
dancing ended and He fell like a rod to the earth.

nipatya sasthitasyäsya / devasya pada-paìkajät 20
ägatya brähmaëé käcit / jaghe raja uttamam
tata utthäya bhagavän / jïätvä tasyä viceöitam 21
nipatya - falling; sasthitasya - staying; asya - of Him; devasya - of the Lord;
pada-paìkajät - from His lotus feet; ägatya - coming; brähmaëé - brähmaëa lady;
käcit - a certain; jaghe - she took; rajaù - dust; uttamam - transcendental; tataù then; utthäya - rising; bhagavän - the Lord; jïätvä - knowing; tasyäù - her
viceöitam - deed.
As the Lord had fallen down and was resting there, a certain brähmaëé approached
Him and took the transcendental dust from His lotus feet. Being aware of her deed,
the all-opulent Personality of Godhead stood up.

duùkhena mahatäviöo / 'nutäpé bahudhäbhavat
tata utthäya sahasä / vegena jähnavé-jale 22
papäta magnas tatraiva / ta dadhära mahä-balaù
avadhüto mahä-bähur / dhtvä téra samäruhat 23
duùkhena - due to grief; mahatä - great; äviöaù - overwhelmed; anutäpé oppressed by sorrow; bahudhä - much; abhavat - it was; tataù - then; utthäya rising; sahasä - suddenly; vegena - with force; jähnavé-jale - in the water of the
Jähnavé (the Gaìgä, who was released by the sage Jahnu); papäta - He fell;
magnaù - immersed; tatra - there; eva - indeed; tam - Him; dadhära - He held;
mahä-balaù - very strong; avadhütaù - who is free from social convention; mahäbähuù - mighty armed; dhtvä - held; téram - bank; samäruhat - He mounted.

[p.290]
Feeling very sorry because of this, He became overcome by grief. Suddenly He
arose and running swiftly, plunged into the waters of the Jähnavé, and thus became
fully immersed in the river water. Then the mighty-armed and very powerful
avadhüta seized the Lord and lifted Him out onto the bank.

çréväsa-haridäsädyä / ägatya träsa-sayutäù
udvignäù sahasä vavrus / ta deveça bhayänvitäù 24
çréväsa-haridäsa-ädyäù - headed by Çréväsa and Haridäsa; ägatya - arriving;
träsa-sayutäù - filled with trepidation; udvignäù - anxious; sahasä - suddenly;
vavruù - they surrounded; tam - Him; deva-éçam - Lord of gods; bhaya-anvitäù filled with fear.
All the bhaktas headed by Çréväsa and Haridäsa at once surrounded the Lord of the
devas, their hearts flooded by anxiety and apprehension.

premotkaëöhäç ca ruruduù / çuklämbara-dvijädayaù
su-çänta sukhina jïätvä / cakruù këa-kathä mithaù 25
prema-utkaëöhäù - hearts troubled by worry; ca - and; ruruduù - they wept;
çuklämbara-dvija-ädayaù - headed by Çuklämbara; su-çäntam - very tranquil;
sukhinam - happy; jïätvä - knowing; cakruù - they made; këa-kathäù - topics of
Kåñëa; mithaù - amongst one another.
Headed by the brähmaëa Çuklämbara, they wept as their hearts were troubled by
worry. However, when they came to know that Gaura was well and happy, they then
engaged in discussing Kåñëa-kathä among themselves.

Thus ends the Eleventh Sarga entitled "The Lord Throws Himself in the River
Jähnavé," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *

[p.291]
Twelfth Sarga
mahä-prakäça-abhiekaù
Gauräìga Reveals His Great Glories and Receives the Sacred Bath

tato väöyä muräres te / jhaöityägatya seçvaräù
upaviçya kaëa sthitvä / vijayasyäçrama yayuù 1
tataù - then; väöyäm - in the dwelling; muräreù - of Muräri; te - they; jhaöityä speedily; ägatya - came; sa-éçvaräù - with the Lords; upaviçya - sitting; kaëam - a
moment; sthitvä - staying; vijayasya - of Vijaya; äçramam - the spiritual shelter;
yayuù - they went.
Then all the bhaktas together with the Lords Gaura, Nityänanda and Advaita
hastily assembled in the home of Muräri Gupta. After sitting down there and resting
a short time, they departed for the äçrama of Vijaya.

uitvä rajané tatra / prabhäte bhagavän paraù
jagämottaraka kula / sa jähnavyäbhramad drutam 2
uitvä - resided; rajaném - the night; tatra - there; prabhäte - at dawn; bhagavän the Lord; paraù - supreme; jagäma - He went; uttarakam - northern; kulam bank; saù - He; jähnavyäù - of the Gaìgä; abhramat - He wandered; drutam freely.
After resting there the night, the Supreme Lord got up at dawn and went to the
northern bank of the Jähnavé and wandered about freely.

brähmaëäù sädhavaù çäntä / vinayena dvijottamäù
ucuù praséda bhagavan / ägaccha sva-gha punaù 3

[p.292]
brähmaëäù - those who know brahma (spirit); sädhavaù - saints; çäntäù peaceful; vinayena - with humility; dvija-uttamäù - exalted twice-born men; ucuù
- they said; praséda - be merciful; bhagavan - O Lord; ägaccha - come; sva-gham to Your own home; punaù - again.
The saintly and peaceful twice-born brähmaëas humbly addressed Him, saying, "Be
merciful, O Lord. Kindly return to Your home."

tat çrutvä vinaya teä / karuëärdro nyavartata
sva-bhakta-hdayänanda / çrémän viçvambharaù prabhuù 4
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vinayam - humility; teäm - their; karuëä-ärdraù melting with mercy; nyavartata - returned; sva-bhakta - of His devotees; hdayaänanda - joy to the hearts; çrémän - glorious; viçvambharaù; prabhuù - Master.
When He heard their mood of humility, the resplendent Viçvambhara Prabhu, who
brings delight to the hearts of His devotees, and whose heart melts with compassion
for all beings, returned home.

tatas te höa-manasas / tyakta-çokä mudänvitäù
äjagmur hariëä sarvve / çréväsasyälaya punaù 5
tataù - then; te - they; höa-manasaù - joyous hearts; tyakta-çokäù - abandoned
lamentation; muda-anvitäù - filled with gladness; äjagmuù - they came; hariëä with Hari; sarve - all; çréväsasya - of Çrévasa; älayam - abode; punaù - again.
Then with joyous hearts the bhaktas abandoned lamentation and returned happily
with Gaura Hari to the abode of Çréväsa.

proväca bhagaväs tatra / sarvveäm eva sannidhau
çëudhva vacana mahya / yüya këa-rasa-pradäù 6
proväca - declared; bhagavän - the Lord; tatra - then; sarveäm - of all; eva -

[p.293]
surely; sannidhau - in the presence; çëudhvam - please hear; vacanam - words;
mahyam - to Me; yüyam - you; këa-rasa-pradäù - the bestower of Kåñëa's
mellows.
In the presence of them all, the Blessed Lord said, "O bestowers of Kåñëa-rasa, hear
My words.

mätara saparityajya / gate mayi dig-antaram
sarvve mä savadiyanti / viruddha ktavän asau 7
mätaram - mother; saparityajya - totally abandoning; gate - gone; mayi - by
Me; dik-antaram - another country; sarve - everyone; mäm - Me; savadiyanti they will say; viruddham - wrong; ktavän - done; asau - He.
"If I abandon My mother and depart for another country, everyone will say that I
have done wrong."

muräriù präha ta çrutvä / maiva nätha vadiyati
kaçcij jano na çaknoti / jévo vaktu sanätanam 8
muräriù - the devotee physician; präha - declared; tam - to Him; çrutvä hearing; mä - not; evam - thus; nätha - O Lord; vadiyati - he will say; kaçcit anyone; janaù - person; na - not; çaknoti - he can; jévaù - living being; vaktum to say; sanätanam - eternal Lord.
Hearing the Lord speak thus, Muräri Gupta declared, "He Nätha! No living being
could speak in that way of their eternal Lord."

tasya tad vacana çrutvä / bhagaväs ta murärikam
äliìgya vara-bähubhyä / haritaù präviçad gham 9
tasya - his; tat-vacanam - these words; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the Lord;
tam - him; murärikam - the familiar Muräri; äliìgya - embracing; vara-

[p.294]
bähubhyäm - with His beautiful arms; haritaù - with joy; präviçat - He entered;
gham - the house.
When the illustrious Lord heard those words, He embraced this lowly Muräri with
His two beautiful arms and entered the house.

tataù pramudito vaidyaù / pulakävalim udvahan
papäöha çlokam eka ca / präcéna yat çëuva tat 10
tataù - then; pramuditaù - very gladly; vaidyaù - the physician; pulaka-ävalim rows of thrill bumps; udvahan - bore; papäöha - he recited; çlokam - verse; ekam one; ca - and; präcénam - ancient; yat - which; çëuva - please listen; tat - that.
Because of his great gladness, that physician's body then bore rows of pulakas and
he then recited one ancient verse in the Lord's presence, which you may kindly hear.

"kväha daridraù päpéyän / kva këaù çré-niketanaù
brahma-bandhur iti smäha / bähubhyä parirambhitaù" 11
kva - whereas; aham - I; daridraù - poverty-stricken; päpéyän - sinner; kva whereas; këaù - the all-attractive Lord; çré-niketanaù - the shelter of the goddess
of fortune; brahma-bandhuù - relative of brähmaëas (fallen brähmaëa); iti - thus;
sma - verily; aham - I; bähubhyäm - with His arms; parirambhitaù - fully
embraced.
"Whereas I am but a poverty-stricken sinner, a brähmaëa in name only, and
whereas Çré Kåñëa is the shelter of goddess Lakñmé, still the Lord has embraced me
with His two arms."

tat çrutväçcaryyam akhila / bhäva sandarçayan prabhuù
raräja sahasä devaù / sahasrärcciù sama-prabhaù 12
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; äçcaryam - amazing; akhilam - completely; bhävam -

[p.295]
ecstasy; sandarçayan - displaying; prabhuù - the Master; raräja - shone; sahasä suddenly; devaù - the Lord; sahasra-arciù - thousand-rayed; sama - equal;
prabhaù - effulgence.
Hearing that wonderful çloka, our divine Prabhu displayed sublime bhäva, and
suddenly radiated effulgence like the thousand-rayed sun.

upaviçyäsane devaù / proväca madhuräkaram
ida deha vijänéhi / sac-cid-ghanam anuttamam 13
upaviçya - sitting; äsane - on a seat; devaù - the Lord; proväca - spoke; madhuraakaram - in a sweet tone; idam - this; deham - body; vijänéhi - you should know;
sat-cit-ghanam - condensed eternity and cognizance; anuttamam transcendental to transcendence.
Seating Himself on an äsana, the Lord spoke sweetly, "You should understand that
this body of Mine, which is transcendental to transcendence, is composed of
condensed eternity and cognizance."

tatas te muditäù sarvve / babhüvuù pulakäïcitäù
çréväsa-paëòitas tatra / snäpayäm äsa ta prabhum 14
svar-nadé-svaccha-salilaiù / püjä cakre yathä-vidhi
nityänando mahä-tejäç / chatra çirasy adhärayat 15
tataù - then; te - they; muditäù - glad; sarve - all; babhüvuù - they became;
pulaka-aïcitäù - hairs erecting; çriväsa-paëòitaù - the expansion of Närada
Muni; tatra - then; snäpayäm äsa - he bathed; tam - Him; prabhum - the Lord;
svaù-nadé - river of heaven; svaccha-salilaiù - with crystalline waters; püjäm worship; cakre - made; yathä-vidhi - according to precept; nitya-änandaù - the
original form of a devotee; mahä-tejäù - of great power; chatram - umbrella;
çirasi - on the head; adhärayat - He held.

[p.296]
Hearing that, all the devotees became immensely blissful and all of their bodies
became covered with pulakas. At that time, Çrévasa bathed Prabhu with the
crystalline waters of the sky-flowing Gaìgä and worshipped Him according to the
vaiñëava precept for guru-püjä. Mighty Nityänanda held an umbrella above Gaura's
head.

gadädharaç ca tämbüla / dadäti çré-mukhopari
kecit sevante ta deva / cämara-vyajanädibhiù 16
gadädharaù - the energy of a devotee; ca - and; tämbülam - betel; dadäti - he
offered; çré-mukha-upari - into His sacred mouth; kecit - some devotees; sevante served; tam - Him; devam - the Lord; cämara - yak-tail whisk; vyajana - fan;
ädibhiù - headed by.
Gadädhara dropped betel into Gaura's lovely mouth while all the other bhaktas
served the divine Lord with various articles such as peacock fans and cämara
whisks.

saìkérttana-rase magnä / hari gäyanti sarvvataù
eva kautuka äpannä / vismitä nanttur jaguù 17
saìkértana-rase - in the mellows of congregational chanting; magnäù immersed; harim - the remover of sin; gäyanti - they sing; sarvataù - in all
directions; evam - thus; kautukam - eagerness; äpannäù - attained; vismitäù mystified; nantuù - they danced; jaguù - they sang.
Immersed in saìkértana-rasa, they broadcast the names of Hari in all directions as
they danced and sang, filled with wonder and eagerness.

Thus ends the Twelfth Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Reveals His Great Glories
and Receives the Sacred Bath," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

[p.297]
* * *
Thirteenth Sarga
brahma-çäpa-varaù
The Brähmaëa's Blessing-Curse

atha para-dine devo / bhakti saçikayan svakän
devälaya yayau vipraiù / särddha sammärjjané kare 1
atha - then; para-dine - on the next day; devaù - the Lord; bhaktim - devotion;
saçikayan - instructing; svakän - to His own men; deva-älayam - the abode of the
Lord; yayau - He went; vipraiù - with the learned brähmaëas; särdham - in
company; sammärjaném - broom; kare - in hand.
On the following day, accompanied by learned brähmaëas the Divine Lord went
with broom in hand to the temple of the Lord, in order to teach the process of
bhakti to his disciples.

kuddäla cäsa-bhägeu / dhaöé kaöi-vare vahan
nütna-vastra-ktoëéo / bäla-süryya-sama-prabhaù 2
kuddälam - dust-pan; ca - and; asa-bhägeu - on the shoulders; dhaöém - old
cloth; kaöi-vare - on His beautiful hips; vahan - carrying; nütna-vastra - new
cloth; kta-uëéaù - made in a turban; bäla-sürya - a young sun; sama-prabhaù equal brilliance.
He carried a dust-pan over His shoulder, and around His beautiful hips He wore an
old cloth. A piece of new cloth was wrapped around His head as a turban, and His
luster resembled the newly risen sun.

[p.298]
äcäryädyä mahätmänaù / kuddäla-märjjané-karäù
këasya haòòipä bhütvä / dvära devälayasya te 3
äcärya - Advaita _cärya; ädyäù - headed by; mahä-ätmänaù - the great souls;
kuddäla-märjjané-karäù - dust-pan and broom in hand; këasya - of Kåñëa;
haòòipäù - servants of the lowest class; bhütvä - become; dväram - door; devaälayasya - of the temple; te - they.
Headed by the _cärya, all of the great souls also held dust-pans and brooms in
hand. Having become Kåñëa's haòòipas (the lowliest of outcaste sweepers), they
assembled together at the gate of the temple.

bhitti sammärjayäm äsuù / saha këena sad-guëäù
eva prakära n-hareù / çikä çata-sahasraçaù 4
bhittim - walls; sammärjayäm äsuù - they cleansed; saha - together; këena with Kåñëa; sat-guëäù - highly qualified men; evam prakäram - in this manner; nhareù - of the human-like Hari; çikäm - instructions; çata-sahasraçaù - hundreds
and thousands.
In company with GauraKåñëa, those saints whose hearts were decorated by exalted
qualities cleansed the walls. Nåhari gave hundreds and thousands of commands to
His crew as they worked (instructing them how and where they should do the
cleaning).

bhagavän svätma-tantro 'pi / käruëyenäbhyaçikayat
çrémän gaura-candra-devo / jagatä käraëa param 5
bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sva-ätma-tantraù - self-sufficient; api although; käruëyena - by His mercy; abhyaçikayat - gave potent lessons; çrémän illustrious; gaura-candra-devaù - the golden-moon-like Lord; jagatäm - of the
material worlds; käraëam - cause; param - supreme.

[p.299]
Although Gaura Candra is the abode of all opulence, the original cause for the
cosmos and , and completely self-sufficient, He still instructed them out of
compassion.

atha käle vrajanta ta / pathi dövä janärdanam
kaçcit kuöhé namasktya / vinayänata-kandharaù 6
uväca bhagavan sarvve / vadanti tva sanätanam
purua deva-deveça / mä samuddhara päpinam 7
atha - then; käle - after some time; vrajantam - walking; tam - Him; pathi - on
the path; dövä - seeing; jana-ardanam - one who stirs the hearts of mankind;
kaçcit - a certain; kuöhé - leper; namasktya - bowing down; vinaya - humbly;
änataù - bowed; kandharaù - head; uväca - he said; bhagavan - O Lord; sarve everyone; vadanti - they say; tvam - You; sanätanam - the primeval; puruam person; deva-deva-éçam - the controller of Lord Viñëu; mäm - me; samuddhara deliver; päpinam - sinner.
Some time later a certain leper saw walking on the path, that very same Janärdana
Caitanya whose qualities thrill the hearts of all. With head lowered the leper
humbly said to Him, "He! Bhagavän, everyone proclaims You to be the primeval
personality of Godhead, the master of even Lord Viñëu. Kindly deliver me, a sinner.

trähi mä duùsahän nätha / kuöha-rogät su-däruëät
tat çrutvä bhagavän kruddhaù / çoëa-padma-vilocanaù 8
trähi - rescue; mäm - me; duùsahät - difficult to tolerate; nätha - O Lord; kuöharogät - from the disease of leprosy; su-däruëät - very dangerous; tat - that; çrutvä
- hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; kruddhaù - angered; çoëa-padma - red lotus;
vilocanaù - eyes.
"He Nätha! Kindly free me from this disease of leprosy, for it is very severe and
difficult to tolerate." Hearing this, the blessed Lord become so angry that His eyes
resembled red lotuses.

[p.300]
uväca bho duräcära / vaiëava-dvea-käraka
çréväsa-paëòita-dvea / ktvä tva hi katha sukhé 9
uväca - He said; bho - Oh!; duräcära - evil-doer; vaiëava-dvea-käraka - causer
of enmity toward a vaiñëava; çréväsa-paëòita - the pure devotee; dveam - hatred;
ktvä - having done; tvam - you; hi - certainly; katham - how?; sukhé - a happy
person.
He said, "O miscreant, you have provoked hatred towards a vaiñëava! After
behaving viciously to Çréväsa Paëita, how now can you expect to be happy?

aväcya vädam uktvä ta / ninäta vaiëavottamam
çata-janmani kuöhé tva / vigatäìgo bhaviyasi 10
aväcya - unspeakable; vädam - words; uktvä - saying; tam - to him; ninätam learned; vaiëava-uttamam - transcendental vaiñëava; çata-janmani - for one
hundred births; kuöhé - leper; tvam - you; vigata-aìgaù - without a healthy body;
bhaviyasi - you shall be.
"You have spoken unspeakable words about that great vaiñëava and learned
scholar. Thus for one hundred births your body shall be consumed by leprosy.

vaiëava-dvea-kärtära / noddharämi kadäcana
bahiù-präëam ima deham / antaù-präëa ca vaiëavam 11
vaiëava-dvea - hatred for a devotee; kärtäram - the provoker; na - not;
uddharämi - I shall deliver; kadäcana - ever; bahiù-präëam - external life; imam this; deham - body; antaù-präëam - internal life; ca - but; vaiëavam - devotee of
Viñëu.
"I shall never deliver one who fosters hatred for the vaiñëava. This body of Mine
constitutes My external life, whereas My internal life is the vaiñëava.

[p.301]
ta dvianti mahä-mohät / patanti niraye 'çucau
vaiëaveu natä ye ca / mä dvianti kathaïcana 12
tän uddhariye sarvvatra / mahä-pätaka-saïcayät
evam uktvä yayau devaù / çréväsasyälaye çubhe 13
tam - him; dvianti - they hate; mahä-mohät - out of great delusion; patanti they fall; niraye - into hell; açucau - unclean; vaiëaveu - unto the vaiñëavas; natä bowed; ye - who; ca - but; mäm - Me; dvianti - they hate; kathaïcana - somehow;
tän - them; uddhariye - I shall deliver; sarvatra - in all situations; mahä-pätaka of great sins; saïcayät - from the accumulation; evam - thus; uktvä - having
spoken; yayau - He went; devaù - the Lord; çréväsasya - of Çréväsa; älaye - to the
abode; çubhe - auspicious.
"Those who bow to the vaiñëavas, but for some reason are inimical to Me, I shall
deliver in all circumstances from great accumulations of sins. But those who out of
great delusion are inimical to the vaiñëava, descend into an unclean hell." So saying,
the Lord departed for the sanctified dwelling of Çréväsa häkura.

upaviçya sukha reme / bhagavän sva-janaiù saha
çréväsa-paëòita präha / karuëärdro jagad-guruù 14
upaviçya - sitting; sukham - comfortably; reme - He took pleasure; bhagavän the Lord; sva-janaiù - with His people; saha - together; çréväsa-paëòitam - the
pure devotee; präha - He said; karuëä-ärdraù - melting with compassion; jagatguruù - the guru of all living beings.
There the Lord sat and happily delighted in the His bhaktas' company. Then the
spiritual master of all worlds, His heart melting out of mercy, spke to Çréväsa Paëita
as follows:

pathé kaçcit kuöha-rogé / duöas tvad-aparädhataù

[p.302]
bhuìkte sa naraka sarvvam / uddhäro naiva dçyate 15
pathé - on the path; kuöha-rogé - a leper; duöaù - rogue; tvat-aparädhataù because of offenses to you; bhuìkte - he experiences; saù - he; narakam - hell;
sarvam - all; uddhäraù - deliverance; na - not; eva - surely; dçyate - it will be
seen.
"On the path I met a wicked man. Due to an offense he made to you, He is
suffering from leprosy. He will suffer the tortures of all the hells, yet still he will not
attain deliverance."

sa präha yo 'parädha me / karoti hi samäsataù
uddhära kuru ta deva / varam etat sadä mama 16
saù - he; präha - said; yaù - who; aparädham - offense; me - to me; karoti - he
does; hi - certainly; samäsataù - in general; uddhäram - deliverance; kuru - make;
tam - him; deva - O Lord; varam - boon; etat - this; sadä - perpetual; mama - my.
Çréväsa said, "O Lord, for eternality kindly grant me this boon. Deliver any person
who commits an offense to me.

päpa-pürëän jagannätha / mädhavädén samuddhara
om ity äha sa bhagavän / sarvva-pätaka-müla-ht 17
päpa-pürëän - filled with sin; jagannätha - Jagäi; mädhava - Mädhäi; ädén - and
all others; samuddhara - please deliver; om - so let it be; iti - thus; äha - said; saù He; bhagavän - the Lord; sarva-pätaka - all sin; müla - root; ht - remover.
"O Lord, please award complete deliverance to those souls utterly pervaded by sin
known as Jagannätha and Mädhava (Jagäi and Mädhäi), as well as all others." Then
the all-opulent Lord, who can remove the very root of all sin from the sinner's heart,
replied, "Om," consenting to Çréväsa's request.

ekadä brähmaëaù kaçcin / ntyanta puruottamam

[p.303]
daöu gatvä na dövä ca / bahir-dväù-sthena väritaù 18
ruöaù para-dine dövä / gaìgä-tére jagad-gurum
su-durmukho ruitvä ta / çäpa däsyann uväca ha 19
ekadä - one day; brähmaëaù - a brähmaëa; kaçcit - a certain; ntyantam dancing; purua-uttamam - the transcendental person; daöum - to see; gatvä having gone; na - not; dövä - seeing; ca - and; bahi-dväù-sthena - by the
doorkeeper; varita - forbidden; ruöaù - angry; para-dine - on the next day; dövä seeing; gaìgä-tére - on the bank of the Gaìgä; jagat-gurum - the guru of the
cosmos; su-durmukhaù - with an evil countenance; ruitvä - being angry; tam him; çäpam - curse; däsyan - injuring; uväca - pronounced; ha - indeed.
Once a certain brähmaëa came to see the dancing of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but he was forbidden entry by the doorman. Thus being unable to see the
Lord, the man became angered. On the following day seeing the guru of the three
worlds upon the bank of the Gaìgä, his face became consumed with fury and he
cursed the Lord, seeking to injure Him.

yajïopavéta vakaù-stha / chittvä çäpa dadau krudhä
yasmät tvan-ntya-samaye / tatra gacchan niväritaù 20
dväù-sthena te tato 'dya tva / sasäräd bahir ävraja
tat çrutvä brähmaëa-vaco / mumoda bhagavän paraù 21
yajïa-upavétam - sacrificial thread; vakaù-stham - upon his chest; chitvä having broken; çäpam - curse; dadau - he delivered; krudhä - angrily; yasmät on account of which; tvat-ntya-samaye - at the time You were dancing; tatra there; gacchan - going; niväritaù - prohibited; dväù-sthena - by the door-keeper;
te - Your; tataù - therefore; adya - now; tvam - You; sasärät - from family life;
bahiù - outside; ävraja - leave; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; brähmaëa-vacaù - the
words of the brähmaëa; mumoda - rejoiced; bhagavän - the Lord; paraù Supreme.

[p.304]
Breaking the sacred thread draped over his chest, the brähmaëa wrathfully
delivered this curse: "Because I was forbidden entry by the door-keeper when I came
at the time You were dancing, therefore You must now leave all the happiness of
Your family life." When the Supreme Lord heard these words uttered by the
brähmaëa, He felt very happy and thought:

kruddha-brähmaëa-çäpo vai / vara eväbhavan mama
uddharämi janän sarvvän / sannyäsäçramam äçritaù 22
kruddha - angered; brähmaëa - one who understands brahman; çäpaù - curse;
vai - certainly; varaù - excellent; eva - surely; abhavat - it has become; mama My; uddharämi - I am delivering; janän - people; sarvän - all; sannyäsa renunciation; äçramam - the spiritual order; äçritaù - taking shelter.
"This angry brähmaëa's curse is actually his blessing on me. By this means I shall
deliver all living people. Accepting the äçrama of sannyäsa I shall depart from my
home!"

iti çrutvä hareù çäpa / çraddhayä parayä saha
brahma-çäpäd vimucyeta / nava sukham aväpnuyät 23
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; hareù - of Hari; çäpam - curse; çraddhayä - with
faith; parayä - with intense; saha - with; brahma-çäpät - from brähmaëa's curses;
vimucyeta - he is released; navam - ever new; sukham - happiness; aväpnuyät - he
can obtain.
A person who hears with transcendental faith of this curse upon Çré Gaura Hari
faith becomes released from all curses made by brähmaëas, and he feels a new and
ever-expanding bliss within his life.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Sarga entitled "The Brähmaëa's Blessing-Curse," in
the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

[p.305]
* * *
Fourteenth Sarga
çré-balabhadra-äveçaù
Gaura Becomes Absorbed in the Mood of Balabhadra

atha prabhäte vimale dyu-näthe smaran / muni-brähmaëa-sajjanän
bahün
sa päöhayan daivata-gaura-candro / babhüva nélämbara-bhävabhävitaù 1
atha - then; prabhäte - at dawn; vimale - pure; dyu-näthe - lord of light (the
sun); smaran - remembering; muni - sages; brähmaëa - knowers of spirit;
sajjanän - saintly men; bahün - men; saù - He; päöhayan - reciting; daivata-gauracandraù - the divine golden-moonlike person; babhüva - He became; nélaambara - the wearer of blue-garment (Balaräma); bhäva - mood; bhävitaù feeling.
One day, as the lord of light arose in the pure dawn, Lord Gaura Candra first
remembered the mantra awarded to Him by Çré I~çvara Puré, and then He recited
from the scriptures before many sages, brähmaëas and saintly persons. At that time,
He became absorbed in the mood of Lord Balaräma, who dresses in blue.

sa häsayan dehi madhüni sämpratas / tv atéva ta megha-sama svana
punaù
çuçräva tasmin samaye haläyudha / nélämbara çveta-mahédhara
prabhum 2
saunanda-päëi vara-padma-locana / dövädbhuta höa-manäù

[p.306]
praharayan
lokän nanarttäkhila-loka-pälakaù / svaya haris tair munibhiù suveça-dhk 3
saù - He; häsayan - causing to laugh; dehi - give; madhüni - honeys; sämprataù now; tu - but; atéva - very; tam - Him; megha-samam - like a cloud; svanam - a
sound; punaù - again; çuçräva - He heard; tasmin - at that; samaye - time; halaäyudham - bearing a plow-weapon; néla-ambaram - blue-garment; çveta - silver;
mahédharam - mountain; prabhum - the Master; saunanda-päëim - the wielder of
the club Sunanda; vara-padma-locanam - who has beautiful lotus eyes; dövä seeing; adbhutam - wonderful; höa-manäù - with jubilant heart; praharayan engladdening; lokän - the people; nanarta - danced; akhila-loka-pälakaù - the
protector of all people; svayam - personally; hariù - the remover of inebrieties;
tai munibhiù - with the sages; su-veça-dhk - wearing a very attractive attire.
In a voice reverberating like a thundercloud, He ordered again and again, "At once
bring my honey-wine " This made all the people laugh. At that time he saw the
beautiful form of Lord Balaräma in this way: Haläyudha (the Plow-Warrior),
Nélämbara (the Wearer of Blue Garments), Çveta-mahédhara (the Mountain of
Silver), Prabhu (the Master), Saunanda-päëi (the Wielder of the club named
Sunanda), Vara-padma-locana (Beautiful Lotus-Eyes)." As Mahäprabhu beheld with
a joyous heart the wonderful vision of Çré Baladeva, He also engladdened the
peoples' hearts. Then the protector of all people, the original Personali1ty of
Godhead, Çré Hari, clad in the most charming of attire, danced amidst the three
groups of sages.

viprair upeto hari-näma-gäyanair / höo 'gamad vaidya-muräriveçmani
taträvadad dehi sudhä madhütkaöä / präcé-divä-nätha iväti-lohitaù 4
vipraiù - with the learned brähmaëas; upetaù - with; hari-näma-gäyanaiù - who
were singing the names of Hari; höaù - thrilled; agamat - He went; vaidya-muräriveçmani - in the house of Muräri, the physician; tatra - there; avadat - He said;
dehi - give; sudhäm - ambrosia; madhu-utkaöäm - strong honey wine; präcé - east;

[p.307]
divä-nätha - lord of the sky; iva - like; ati-lohitaù - very red.
Enlivened with joy, Gaura entered the house of the physician Muräri, accompanied
by the vipras who chanted the names of Hari. He appeared like the bright sky-lord
rising in the east. Then He again said, "Bring Me very strong and ambrosial honey
wine!"

jiëuù svaya toya-su-pürëa-bhäjana / hastena dhtväpibad ambu
pävanam
nanarta matto 'ti-hasan luöhan kitau / tadä 'stuvas te halina
dvijottamäù 5
jiëuù - the victorious; svayam - by His own desire; toya-su-pürëa-bhäjanam pot brimming with water; hastena - with a hand; dhtvä - holding; apibat - He
drank; ambu - water; pävanam - sanctified; nanarta - He danced; mattaù intoxicated; ati-hasan - laughing loudly; luöhan - rolling; kitau - on the earth;
tadä - then; astuvan - they praised; te - they; halinam - the wielder of the plow;
dvija-uttamäù - the exalted brähmaëas.
The ever-victorious Viñëu held aloft a brimming pot of pure water and drank from
it. Then the Lord danced in an intoxicated fashion, loudly laughing and rolling
about on the ground, while the exalted brähmaëas offered prayers to the Lord as the
Plow-Warrior.

petuù pthivyä caraëämbuja-dvaye / mumoda cätéva muhur muhur
janaù
eva sa devo baladeva-lélayä / nanarta coväca ca säma-nisvanaù 6
petuù - they fell; pthivyäm - on the earth; caraëa-ambuja-dvaye - at His two
lotus feet; mumoda - He enjoyed; ca - and; atéva - intensely; muhuù muhuù repeatedly; janaù - the person; evam - thus; saù - He; devaù - the Lord; baladevalélayä - through the pastime of Baladeva; nanarta - He danced; ca - and; uväca He said; ca - and; säma-nisvanaù - in gentle tones.

[p.308]
They fell on the earth at His two lotus feet, while the Personality of Godhead
delighted profoundly and repeatedly in the pleasure-pastimes of Baladeva. He
danced and spoke in a gentle tone:

näha sa këo vacasä sukhé bhaved / yo me prayacchantu su-peyam
adbhutam
mallo 'yam ity aìgulinä dvijaika / kipan su-düre prähiëot pthivyäm
7
papäta so 'py ägata-sädhvaso 'bhüd / eva vijahre bhagavän svalélayä
prätaù samärabhya divävasäna / yävat sa devo baladeva-lélayä 8
na - not; aham - I; saù - He; këaù - the all attractive Lord; vacasä - by words;
sukhé - happy; bhavet - I may be; yaù - who; me - to me; prayacchantu - he must
give; su-peyam - fine drink; adbhutam - wonderful; mallaù - wrestler; ayam - this;
iti - thus; aìgulinä - by a finger; dvija-ekam - one brähmaëa; kipan - throwing
down; su-düre - at a great distance; prähiëot - He sent; pthivyäm - on the earth;
papäta - he fell; saù - He; api - also; ägata-sädhvasaù - becoming perturbed; bhüdevam - the brähmaëa; vijahre - He enjoyed; bhagavän - the Lord; sva-lélayä - by
His pastimes; prätaù - early; samärabhya - beginning; diva-avasänam - to the end
of the day; yävat - until; saù - He; devaù - the Divinity; bala-deva-lélayä - with his
pastime of Baladeva.
"I am not like Kåñëa; He may become pleased by mere words. This wrestler should
give Me some of that sublime and wondrous beverage." Saying this in the mood of
Balaräma, Lord Gaura touched a brähmaëa with His mere finger and sent him flying
a great distance. That brähmaëa finally fell upon the earth greatly disturbed. Thus,
as His pleasure-pastime the all-opulent Lord enjoyed Himself from dawn until dusk
as He enacted the pastimes of Baladeva.

kréòä vidhatte 'dbhuta-rüpa-veçaù / svaya kta-snäna-vidhir yayau

[p.309]
gham
bhuìkte sva-vargaiù pariveöitaù svaya / çré-gaura-candro jagatä
patiù prabhuù 9
kréòäm - sport; vidhatte - He enacted; adbhuta-rüpa-veçaù - astonishing beauty
and attire; svayam - of His own accord; kta-snäna-vidhiù - practiced the bathing
principle; yayau - He went; gham - home; bhuìkte - He enjoyed; sva-vargaiù with His groups; pariveöitaù - surrounded; svayam - Himself; çré-gaura-candraù the Golden Moon; jagatä patiù - protector of the material worlds; prabhuù Master.
Dressed in stunningly attractive attire, Çré Gaura Candra, master and protector of
all people by His sweet desire, enjoyed bathing and playing water sports in the
Gaìgä and eating surrounded by his dear associates. Then He returned home.

athäpare 'hni paritapta-deho / muhur muhur moham aväpa devaù
smaran vane ta parikérëa-mürdha-jäs / tadä dvijäs ta salilair
asiïcayan 10
atha - then; apare - on another; ahni - on a day; paritapta-dehaù - very hot
body; muhuù muhuù - repeatedly; moham - delusion; aväpa - He got; devaù - the
Lord; smaran - remembering; vane - in the forest of Våndävana; tam - Him;
parikérëa-mürdha-jäù - scattered hair; tadä - then; dvijäù - brähmaëas; tam Him; salilaiù - with waters; asiïcayan - they sprinkled.
On the next day, the Lord's body became very feverish. His hair became scattered
and again and again He experienced transcendental delusions recalling the pastimes
of Balaräma in the forest-bowers of Våaja. The brähmaëas sprinkled Him with
water.

gadädhara samprati labdha-saìjïaù / proväca vaikalya-girä svaya
prabhuù
samänayäsädya samasta-bandhün / sad-vaiëaväs tän pratilokayämi

[p.310]
11
gadädharam; samprati - immediately; labdha - regained; saìjïaù consciousness; proväca - He spoke; vaikalya-girä - with faltering words; svayam spontaneously; prabhuù - the Master; samänaya - bring together; äsädya - going
to; samasta-bandhün - all my friends; sat-vaiëavän - pure vaiñëavas; tän - them;
pratilokayämi - I can see.
Immediately Prabhu regained consciousness and spoke in a faltering voice to
Gadädhara, "Go to all My friends and bring them together, so that I may look upon
those saintly vaiñëavas."

tadäjïayä te muditäù samägatä / äcäryya-ratna-pramukhä
mahattamäù
dövä hari vihvalita sa-gadgada- / svara vimüòhä iva te bhçärdditäù
12
tadä - then; äjïayä - by His order; te - they; muditäù - joyously; samägatäù assembled; äcärya-ratna - the jewel among teachers; pramukhäù - headed by;
mahattamäù - the greatest souls; dövä - seeing; harim - the remover of sin;
vihvalitam - overwhelmed; sa-gadgada-svaram - with a choked sound; vimüòhäù perplexed; iva - as indeed; te - they; bhça - extremely; arditäù - tormented.
Thus, upon His order those very great souls headed by _cärya Ratna joyously
assembled. But when they saw Gaura Hari completely overwhelmed, and uttering
sounds with a voice choked by emotion, they became very anguished and perplexed.

babhüvur ücuç ca kim atra käraëa / vadasva täta svayam eva
sämpratam
çrutvävadat tän n-hariù su-vihvalo / dto mayä çveta-girir
haläyudhaù 13
babhüvuù - they were; ücuù - they said; ca - and; kim - what? atra - here;

[p.311]
käraëam - the cause; vadasva - please tell; täta - dear one; svayam - of your own
accord; eva - surely; sämpratam - now; çrutvä - hearing; avadat - He said; tän - to
them; n-hariù - Hari in a human-like form; su-vihvalaù - very overwhelmed; dtaù
- seen; mayä - by Me; çveta-giriù - the silver mountain; hala-äyudhaù - whose
weapon is a plow.
They inquired, "Dear Lord, if You wish, please tell us the cause for Your present
state." Hearing them, Nåhari replied with intense absorption, "I have seen the Silver
Mountain, the Wielder of the Plow.

su-varëa-saunanda-karaù sahasra-gur / yathä prabhäte vara-hemabhüaëaù
çrutvä tadä çré-yuta-candra-çekharä- / cäryo 'tha ta präha vadasva
tat prabho 14
döas tvayä yat sahasä tadä haris / tatraiva gatvä halina dadarça
tatas tad-äveçatayä punar vibhur / nanartta tad-veça-dharo
mudänvitaiù 15
su-varëa - fine color (gold); saunanda-karaù - whose hand wields the club
Sunanda; sahasra-guù - thousand-rayed (sun); yathä - like; prabhäte - at dawn;
vara-hema-bhüaëaù - wearing fine gold ornaments; çrutvä - hearing; tadä - then;
çré-yuta - blessed by Çré (Lakmé); candra-çekhara-äcäryaù; tam - Him; präha - he
said; vadasva - please say; tat - Him; prabho - O Master; döaù - seen; tvayä - by
You; yat - who; sahasä - suddenly; tadä - then; hariù; tatra - there; eva - indeed;
gatvä - went; halinam - the plow-holder; dadarça - He saw; tataù - then; tat that; äveçatayä - by His absorption; punaù - again; vibhuù - the all-pervading;
nanarta - He danced; tat-veça-dharaù - putting on the dress of Balaräma; mudäanvitaiù - with them who were filled with joy.
"In His hand He holds the golden club Sunanda. He appears like the thousandrayed sun as it rises at dawn, and He wears fine gold ornaments." Hearing this,
Candra Çekhara _cärya then said, "O Prabhu, please speak further of the person You

[p.312]
saw." Then Gaura Hari suddenly went to the bearer of the plow and looked upon
Him. Then on account of being immersed in the mood of Balaräma, the all-pervasive
Lord donned Lord Balaräma's attire and danced again in the company of His
devotees, whose hearts were filled with gladness.

höo hariù kautuka-ntya-jalpitair / änanditätmä kara-bhaìgasaìgataiù
sad-vaiëavaiù puëya-mahé-dharorjjitaiù / kräntair vidhuù svargasukha pada-kramaiù 16
höaù - thrilled; hariù - the dispeller of evil; kautuka - eagerness; ntya - dancing;
jalpitaiù - by their skillful use of words; änandita-ätmä - delighted at heart; karabhaìga - dancing of hands; saìgataiù - appropriate; sat-vaiëavaiù - with the pure
vaiñëavas; puëya-mahédhara - mountains; ürjitaiù - powerful; kräntaiù surpassing; vidhuù - the moon; svarga-sukham - heavenly happiness; padakramaiù - with the footsteps.
The moon of Hari was thrilled and delighted at heart by the pure vaiñëavas. By
their expressive use of words, they described the attributes of the Lord in song, and
by appropriate hand-gestures they praised Him while dancing. As they danced, they
appeared like very pious and mighty mountains, and the movements of their
dancing feet surpassed heavenly happiness.

eva dinänta sa ninäya yajïa-bhuk / yajïaiù su-saìkérttanakair
jagad-dhitaiù
tato 'parähne punar eva deve / ntyonmukhe väruëé-divya-gandhaiù
17
apüri sarvväni diçä mukhäni / tadä samäghräya janä nananduù
çré-räma-näma-dvija-varyya-sattamo / 'paçyat tadä tatra samägatän
bahün 18
evam - thus; dina-antam - the day's end; saù - He; ninäya - passed; yajïa-bhuk -

[p.313]
the enjoyer of sacrifice; yajïaiù - by sacrifices; su-saìkértanakaiù - by pure groupchanting; jagat - for the living entities; hitaiù - by the benefit; tataù - then; aparaahne - on the next day; punaù - again; eva - surely; deve - the Lord; ntya - in
dancing; unmukhe - the face raised; väruëé-divya-gandhaiù - by the divine
fragrance of honey wine; apüri - filled; sarväni - all; diçäm - of directions;
mukhäni - principal; tadä - then; samäghräya - smelling; janäù - the people;
nananduù - took pleasure; çré-räma-näma - of the name Çré Räma; dvija-varyasattamaù - the exalted best of the twice-born; apaçyat - he saw; tadä - then; tatra
- there; samägatän - assembled; bahün - many.
Thus did the Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrifice, pass His time until the day's end in
the sublime sacrifice of saìkértana, for the benefit of all living entities. Then on the
following day, as the Lord again raised His face in dancing, the divine fragrance of
Väruëé filled all directions, and when the people smelled it, they felt pleasure. The
eminent brähmaëa of the name Çré Räma then noticed that there were many great
souls assembled in that place.

karëaika-padmän kamaläyatekaëän / çrotraika-vinyasta-sukuëòalärcciä
vidyotamänän sita-vastra-mastakän / çrutvä tato 'nye nantuù
praharitäù 19
karëa-eka-padmän - lotus on one ear; kamala - lotus; äyata - spread; ékaëän eyes; çrotra-eka-vinyasta - placed on one ear; su-kuëòala - fine earring; arciä brilliant; vidyotamänän - illuminating; sita-vastra - white cloths; mastakän heads; çrutvä - heard; tataù - then; anye - other; nantuù - they danced; praharitäù
- very jubilantly.
Each of them had a lotus pushed over one of their ears, and a glittering earring
upon the other. Their eyes were wide-spread like lotus petals, their heads were
wrapped in white turbans, and their presence was very illuminating. After Gaura
Hari's bhaktas heard these topics of Kåñëa-kathä from Çré Räma, they sang and
danced very jubilantly.

[p.314]
tatraiva kaçcid vana-mäli-nämä / paçyaty ala käïcana-nirmita kitau
saunandana süryya-kara-prakäçaka / sahöa-romäçrubhir ärdravigrahaù 20
tatra - there; eva - surely; kaçcit - a certain; vana-mäli-nämä - named Vanamäli; paçyati alam - he saw; käïcana-nirmitam - made of gold; kitau - on the
earth; saunandanam - the club called Sunanda (Balaräma's club); sürya-karaprakäçakam - radiant like the sunshine; sahöa-roma - hairs bristling; açrubhiù with tears; ärdra-vigrahaù - wet body.
There was also a certain bhakta of the name Vanamälé, who saw on the ground the
golden club of Lord Balaräma named Saunanda, radiant as the sunshine. Thus all his
hairs thrilled with ecstasy and his whole body became wet as tears of joy flooded
from his eyes.

tato nanarttäkhila-loka-nätho / haläyudhäveça-rasena mattaù
dövävadhütaç ca ninäya vakasi / ta gaura-candra ca rasena tena 21
tataù - then; nanarta - he danced; akhila-loka-näthaù - the Lord of all worlds;
hala-äyudha - plow fighter (Balaräma); äveça - absorbed; rasena - by the mellow;
mattaù - delighted; dövä - seeing; avadhütaù - Nityänanda; ca - and; ninäya bringing; vakasi - on the chest; tam - Him; gaura-candram - the golden-moonlike Lord; ca - and; rasena - by the mellow; tena - by that.
Then the Lord of all worlds danced, intoxicated by absorption in the rasa of the
Plow-Warrior. Observing this, the avadhüta held Gaura Candra to His chest in order
to savor that rasa.

nabho-gatä nemur anuttamena / bhävena tptä divi-jäù saheçäù
premäçru-pürëäù pulakäkulävtäù / çré-räma-näräyaëa-këa-jalpinaù
22
nabhaù-gatäù - taken to the skies; nemuù - they bowed down; anuttamena -

[p.315]
incomparable; bhävena - ecstatic mood; tptäù - satisfied; divi-jäù - the residents
of heaven; saha-éçäù - with Çiva; prema-açru-pürëäù - filled with tears of love;
pulaka - erections of the hairs; akula - eagerly absorbed; avtäù - covered; çréräma-näräyaëa-këa - names of the Lord; jalpinaù - chanting.
In the skies the residents of heaven as well as Çiva, offered their prostrated
obeisances, delighted by Lord Gaura's unparalleled ecstatic mood. Tears filled their
eyes, and due to eagerness their bodies became covered by pulakas as they chanted
the names, "Çré Räma! Näräyaëa! Kåñëa!"

eva niçä tä sa ninäya devas / tato yayau svaù-sarid-ambu-madhye
vigähya tasmin sva-janaiù sameto / hasan çanaiù kréòanaka cakära
23
evam - thus; niçäm - night; täm - that; saù - He; ninäya - passing; devaù - the
Divine Lord; tataù - then; yayau - He went; svaù-sarit - of the celestial river;
ambu-madhye - in the midst of the water; vigähya - diving; tasmin - in that; svajanaiù - with His own men; sametaù - together; hasan - laughing; çanaiù gradually; kréòanakam - play; cakära - He made.
Thus the divine Lord passed that night. In the early dawn He went into the middle
of the waters of the skyGaìgä. There He bathed, dived and created sports in the
company of His associates.

tato 'gamad veçma nija jitärir / janä namasktya hari nijäçramam
yayuù prabhäte punar eva sarvve / samägatä draöu ajäìghripaìkajam 24
tataù - then; agamat - He walked; veçma - abode; nijam - own; jita-ariù - the
conqueror of the foe (mind); janäù - the people; namasktya - bowing down;
harim - the remover of sin; nija-äçramam - His hermitage; yayuù - they walked;
prabhäte - in the bright morning; punaù - again; eva - again; sarve - all;
samägatäù - assembled; draöum - to see; aja - the unborn; aìghri - feet; paìkajam

[p.316]
- mud-born (lotus).
Then in the light of dawn the conqueror of the mind walked to His home, and the
bhakta-janas after offering praëäma to Çré Hari, went to their own respective
äçramas and after they had completing their morning duties, all of them returned,
eager to have a sight of the unborn Lord's lotus feet.

eva prakäräëi bahüni cakre / haläyudhäveça-dharo mukundaù
sva-bhakti-pürëo jagatä hitärthé / çré-këa-caitanya-prabhuù svaya
hariù 25
evam - thus; prakäräëi - kinds; bahüni - many; cakre - He made; hala-äyudhä the plow-fighter; äveça-dharaù - held absorption; mukundaù - the giver of
liberation; sva-bhakti-pürëaù - full with devotion for Himself; jagatäm - of all
sentient beings; hita-arthé - who desires the welfare; çré-këa-caitanya-prabhuù the master, yuga-avatära; svayam - Himself; hariù - the remover of evils.
Thus absorbed in the mood of Haläyudha, Lord Mukunda enact many varieties of
pleasure-pastimes. He is the original Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari. Now He has
appearing as Çré Kåñëa Caitanya Prabhu, who is overflowing with devotion for his
inner self for the benefit of all living entities.

çëoti yaù çré-halinaç caritra / vicitra-veçair yad akäri sa prabhuù
bhavet sadä bhakti-rasäbhimatto / mto 'çnute çré-puruottamämtam
26
çëoti - he hears; yaù - who; çré-halinaù - of the splendid wielder of the plow;
caritram - behavior; vicitra-veçaiù - astonishing garb; yat - which; akäri - made;
saù - He; prabhuù - the Master; bhavet - it can be; sadä - always; bhakti-rasa - the
mellows of devotion; abhimattaù - intoxicated; mtaù - dead; açnute - he obtains;
çré-purua-uttama - the Transcendental Person; amtam - immortal.
One who hears of these activities performed by Mahäprabhu as He wore the
astonishing attire of the Plow-Warrior, can obtain perpetual intoxication in bhakti-

[p.317]
rasa, and at the time of death, enter the deathless nectaean abode of the Ultimate
Person.

Thus ends the Fourteenth Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Becomes Absorbed in the
Mood of Balabhadra," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Fifteenth Sarga
gopé-bhäva-varëana-bhakti-yogaù
A Description of the Ecstatic Moods of the Gopés as Bhakti-Yoga

uväca këaù kala-näda-ramya / vaco 'mta çläghya-sa-gadgadasvaram
varäha-devo bhagavän dadau mäm / äliìgana yajïa-vapur
mahédharaù 1
uväca - He said; këaù - ender of the cycle of birth and death (sasära); kalanäda - sweet-sounding; ramyam - charming; vacaù - words; amtam - nectar;
çläghya - praiseworthy; sa-gadgada-svaram - sounds of choking; varäha-devaù the boar avatära; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; dadau - He gave; mäm - to Me;
äliìganam - an embrace; yajïa-vapuù - the form of sacrifice; mahé-dharaù mountain.
In a delightful and melodious tone, Gaura Kåñëa falteringly uttered some glorious
words of nectar, "Bhagavän Varäha-deva, whose form is personified sacrifice and
who resembles a great mountain, has embraced Me.

haläyudho me hdi sanniviöaù / sa veëu-päëir nayanäïjano 'bhüt

[p.318]
itérita tasya niçamya viprä / höä nanandur nantur mahäntaù 2
hala-äyudhaù - the plow-warrior, Balaräma; me - My; hdi - in the heart;
sanniviöaù - situated; saù - He; veëu-päëiù - holding a flute; nayana-aïjanaù eyes blacked by eye-ointment; abhüt - He was; iti - thus; éritam - uttered; tasya His; niçamya - listening; vipräù - the learned brähmaëas; höäù - thrilled;
nananduù - rejoiced; nantuù - they danced; mahäntaù - the great souls.
"In My heart Haläyudha resides. In His hand He holds a flute , and the edges of His
eyes are black with collyrium." Hearing the Lord speak in this way, the hearts of the
learned and great-hearted brähmaëas became inspired, and in exultation they
danced.

çréväsam äha prahasan sa këo / veëu prayacchädya madéyam
uttamam
tadävadat so 'pi tavälaye vibho / bhémätmajäyäù parirakito 'sti saù
3
çréväsa - the pure devotee; äha - He said; prahasan - laughing; saù - He; këaù;
veëum - the flute; prayaccha - bestow; adya - now; madéyam - My; uttamam transcendental; tadä - then; avadat - He said; saù api - that very person; tava Your; älaye - in Your abode; vibho - great Lord; bhéma-ätmajäyäù - of the
daughter of Bhéçmaka (Rukmiëé); parirakitaù - protected; asti - He; saù - He.
Then Lord Kåñëa laughingly spoke to Çréväsa, "Now bring Me My transcendental
flute." Then that Paëita replied, "Great Lord, that flute is within Your dwelling,
carefully guarded by the daughter of Bhémaka.

veëus tad asmin samaye na labhyate / rätrau kaväöäpihite ghäntare
eva niçamya prahasan niçä tä / bhaktaiù sama loka-gurur ninäya 4
veëuù - the flute; tat - that; asmin - at this; samaye - time; na - not; labhyate - it
is available; rätrau - at night; kaväöa - in a cabinet; apihite - concealed; gha-

[p.319]
antare - in the house; evam - thus; niçamya - hearing; prahasan - laughing; niçäm
- night; täm - that; bhaktaiù - with the devotees; samam - together; loka-guruù the spiritual guide for the people; ninäya - passing.
"At this time Your Lordship's flute is not available, for it is night and the flute is
kept within a cabinet within the house." Hearing this, the guru of the people
laughed loudly. Thus He passed the night with His bhaktas.

prätar yayus te muditä dvijeçä / natvä hari svaù-sarid-ambumadhye
snätvä sukhenaiva hari samarcya / bhuktvä prasäda paramä muda
yayuù 5
prätaù - early morning; yayuù - they walked; te - they; muditäù - joyously;
dvija-éçäù - the chiefs of the twice-born; natvä - bowing; harim - the remover of
evils; svaù-sarit - the sky-river (Gaìgä); ambu-madhye - in the middle of the
water; snätvä - having bathed; sukhena - gladly; eva - surely; harim - the remover
of sin; samarcya - worshipping; bhuktvä - having enjoyed; prasädam - foods
offered and accepted by the Lord; paramäm - supreme; mudam - delight; yayuù they felt.
In the early morning, after bowing before Çré Hari, those leaders of the twice-born
joyously walked to take bath in the midst of the sky-river. Then after offering their
daily worship to the mürti of Çré Hari, they accepted His prasädam and thereby felt
supreme delight.

eva mahä-kréòanaka muräreù / çrutvä vimucyeta bhavärëavän
naraù
paöhel labhet tad pada-paìkaje rati / druta mahä-roga-gaëäd
vimucyate 6
evam - thus; mahä-kréòanakam - great sporting; mura-areù - of the enemy of
Mura; çrutvä - hearing; vimucyeta - he may be delivered; bhava-arëavät - from

[p.320]
the ocean of material existence; naraù - a man; paöhet - he can recite; labhet - he
can obtain; tat - that; pada-paìkaje - at the lotus feet; ratim - affection; drutam fluid; mahä-roga-gaëät - from a host of diseases; vimucyate - he is liberated.
A man who hears of these very playful pastimes of the enemy of Murä becomes
fully delivered out of the ocean of birth and death which is filled a host of material
maladies and one who recites them swiftly attains affectionate attachment for His
lotus feet.

yasya päda-kamale kamaläyäù / préta-sägara-varo muhur babhau
tasya këa-pada-paìkajäçraye / gopa-yauvana-vaçe 'bhavan manaù 7
yasya - whose; päda-kamale - at the lotus feet; kamaläyäù - of the goddess of
fortune; préta-sägara - ocean of love; varaù - excellent; muhuù - again; babhau He shone; tasya - His; këa - the all-attractive Lord; pada-paìkaja - the lotus feet
of; äçraye - at the shelter; gopa-yauvana - the young cowherd; vaçe - controlled;
abhavat - it became; manaù - mind.
For a man thus absorbed in contemplating Çré Gauräìga's lotus feet which are
tended by Kamalä, the splendid ocean of love shines ever more brightly, and his
mind becomes captivated by that youthful gopa of the name Kåñëa, having taken
shelter at His feet.

ekadä samabhidhäya su-veça / yoitä smita-sudhä-mukha-candraù
candra-çekhara-ghäìgane vibhur / narttanam nija-janaiù sa cakära
8
ekadä - once; samabhidhäya - dressing; su-veçam - in a sublime attire; yoitäm of the women; smita-sudhä - smile of nectar; mukha-candraù - moon-like face;
candra-çekhara - expansion of the moon-god; gha - the house; aìgane - in the
courtyard; vibhuù - all-pervading one; nartanam - drama; nija-janaiù - with His
own men; saù - He; cakära - performed.
Once the sense-controlled great Lord with His moon-like face and smile of nectar

[p.321]
dressed Himself in sublime women's attire and performed a drama with His
associates in the courtyard of Candra-Çekharäcärya.

tatra närada iväbabhau mahän / çré-pateù prathama-jo dvijottamaù
daëòavad bhuvi nipatya surariù / präëaman munir ajätma-jo 'jitam
9
tatra - then; nära-daù - the giver of Nära (Hari); iva - like; äbabhau - radiantly
appeared; mahän - the great; çré-pateù - of the protector of Lakmé, Näräyaëa;
prathama-jaù - the first-born dvija-uttamaù - the transcendental brähmaëa;
daëòa-vat - like a rod; bhuvi - on the earth; nipatya - falling; sura-iù - the sage
amongst the gods; präëaman - bowing down; muniù - the sage; aja - of the
unborn Brahmä; ätma-jaù - the son; ajitam - to the unconquerable Lord
First the great brähmaëa, Çréväsa Paëòita, the elder brother of Çrépati Paëòita,
radiantly appeared on stage as the great Närada, sage amongst the gods, and son of
the unborn Lord Brahmä. Falling down like a rod on the ground before the
unconquerable son of Çacé, he offered obeisances in surrender.

mä pratéhi çanakair idam uktvä / çré-gadädhara-mahésuram äha
gopike 'vadaù surari-pade tva / sampraëamya nata-kandhara-cittä
10
täta-mät-caraëa parihtya / këa-päda-kamalasya su-seväm
karttum éça iha tat-karuëäbdheù / päda-padma-karuëä mayi te syät
11
mäm - Me; pratéhi - please accept; çanakaiù - gently; idam - this; uktvä - saying;
çré-gadädhara - the energy of a devotee; mahé-suram - earth-god (a brähmaëa);
äha - he said; gopike - O gopikä; avadaù - you said; sura-i-pade - at the feet of the
sage-gods; tvam - you; sampraëamya - bowing down fully; nata-kandhara-cittä with bowed head and humble mind; täta-mät-caraëam - the feet of father and
mother; parihtya - giving up; këa - of Kåñëa; päda-kamalasya - of the lotus feet;

[p.322]
su-seväm - fine service; kartum - to do; éçe - unto the Lord; iha - in this world; tat
- Kåñëa; karuëä-abdheù - of the ocean of mercy; päda-padma - the lotus feet;
karuëä - mercy; mayi - unto me; te - Your; syät - may it be.
Then Lord Gaura said gently to the brähmaëa, Gadädhara, "Please have faith in
this story of mine, O Gopikä! Once in ancient times you bowed down your body and
humbled your heart at the feet of this Närada, sage amongst the gods. You said to
him `Master, I have abandoned the service of the feet of my father and mother just
to render unalloyed service to Çré Çyämasundara Kåñëa's lotus feet. Kindly bless me.
Let the mercy flowing from the lotus feet of that ocean of mercy descend on me.'

evam äpta-vacasä sa munis tä / samprahöa-vadanaù punar äha
apsare sura-nadé-payasi tva / mägha-mäsa-çatakaiù sadä kuru 12
evam - thus; äpta-vacasä - with words of trust; saù - he; muniù - the sage; täm her; saprahöa-vadanaù - very jubilant face; punaù - again; äha - he said; apsare O heavenly dancing girl; sura-nadé - of the river of the sages; payasi - in the
water; tvam - you; mägha-mäsa - the month of mid-Febuary to mid-March;
çatakaiù - by hundreds; sadä - always; kuru - do.
"After you uttered such trusting words to him, Närada replied with a jubilant
countenance, `O apsarä, bathe with fixed attention for one hundred times a hundred
months of Mägha within the waters of the river of the sages.

snänam eka-manasä tadä bhavet / këa-päda-kamalasya su-sevä
tat kta muni-vaco hi bhavatyä / tena gokula ihäbhavaj janiù 13
snänam - bath; eka-manasä - with one-pointed attention; tadä - then; bhavet it can be; këa-päda-kamalasya - of Kåñëa's lotus feet; su-sevä - the sublime
service; tat - that; ktam - done; muni-vacaù - the words of the sage; hi - indeed;
bhavatyä - by your honor; tena - by that; gokule - in Gokula; iha - in this world;
abhavat - it became; janiù - birth.
"`Then it will be possible to render pure service to Kåñëa's lotus feet.' Because

[p.323]
your grace strictly followed the muni's instructions, you have presently taken birth
in the land of Gokula within this world.

uttamäm atitarä hari-bhakti / prema-nirbhara-rasormmibhir ärdrä
durlabhä tri-jagato munir äpa / yä pragäyati mudä çukadevaù 14
uttamäm - transcendental; atitaräm - excellent; hari-bhaktim - devotion to
Hari; prema - love; nirbhara - ardent; rasa - of flavor; urmibhiù - by the waves;
ärdrä - wet; durlabhäm - rare; tri-jagataù - from the three worlds; muniù - the
sage; äpa - he obtained; yäm - which; pragäyati - he extols; mudä - with joy; çukadevaù - the parrot divinity, son of Veda-Vyäsa.
"The sage Närada has attained a superexcellence of Hari-bhakti which is very
rarely attained throughout the length and breadth of the three worlds. He has
become wet from bathing in the myriad waves of the ocean of spontaneous premarasa. It is such bhakti as this which Çukadeva extols with joy.

tathä ca (10.47.63)
vande nanda-vraja-stréëä / pada-reëum abhékëaçaù
yäsä hari-kathodgéta / punäti bhuvana-trayam 15
vande - I praise; nanda - where Nanda ruled; vraja-stréëäm - of the milkmaids
of Vraja; pada-reëum - the dust of the feet; abhékëaçaù - incessantly; yäsäm whose; hari-kathä - topics of Hari; udgétam - celebrated; punäti - it purifies;
bhuvana-trayam - the three worlds.
[Here follows verse 63 from the Forty-Seventh Chapter of the Tenth Canto of
Çrémad Bhägavatam:]
"Çré Çukadeva Gosvämé said, `I forever praise the foot-dust falling from the feet of
the milkmaids who dwell in the land of Vraja where Nanda is king, because their
songs describing the pastimes of Çré Hari purify the three worlds.'

ki vadämi hari-bhakti-mahattva / sarvva-päpa-gaëavän dvija-sünuù

[p.324]
duùkha-pälibhir ajämila-nämä / putra-mätram anucintya jagäma 16
kim - what?; vadämi - I say; hari-bhakti-mahattvam - the glories of devotional
service to Hari; sarva-päpa-gaëavän - a person in whom there was a host of all
sins; dvija-sünuù - the son of a brähmaëa; duùkha-pälibhiù - from heaps of
miseries; ajämila-nämä - named Ajämila; putra-mätram - merely his son;
anucintya - thinking; jagäma - He went.
"How can I praise adequately the glories of Hari-bhakti? There was once a
brähmaëa's son named Ajämila, in whose character every variety of vice was
abundantly present, and who was thus awaiting immense suffering in his future
lives. However, simply by uttering the name of `Näräyaëa,' although he was thinking
only of his son, he departed from that hellish fate.

näma-mätra-vibhavena bhaväbdheù / päram eva para-dustarasya ca
gacchatu sa-gaëa eva kpäbdher / dhäma ki punar ajasya su-sevä 17
näma-mätra - simply the holy name; vibhavena - by the potency; bhava-abdheù from the ocean of birth and death; päram - beyond; eva - surely; para-dustarasya
- very difficult to cross over; ca - and; gacchatu - he must go; sa-gaëaù - with his
associates; eva - surely; kpä-abdheù - of the ocean of mercy; dhäma - the abode;
kim punaù - how much more?; ajasya - of the unborn; su-sevä - pure service.
"By the power of the holy name of the Lord, Ajämila and all those associated with
him could surmount the insurmountable ocean of birth and death to attain the
abode of the ocean of mercy, Lord Näräyaëa. And how much more is liberation
assured for one who renders favorable service to the unborn Lord?"

evam uktavati bhü-sura-varye / prema-sägara-rasormmibhir ärdräù
sambabhüvur ati te rasa-pürëäs / türëam eva muditä dvija-varyäù
18
evam - thus; uktavati - saying; bhü-sura-varye - the best of brähmaëas; prema-

[p.325]
sägara - the ocean of love; rasa-urmibhiù - the waves of rasa; ärdräù - wet;
sambabhüvuù - they became; ati - very; te - they; rasa-pürëäù - full of mellows;
türëam - quickly; eva - surely; muditäù - engladdened; dvija-varyäù - the
eminent twice-born men.
After Çré Gaura, the jewel of the brähmaëa community, had thus spoken, the hearts
of those eminent twice-born men became greatly enlivened until they overflowed
with rasa and quickly became drenched by the waves of the prema-sägara.

yad aìghri-nakha-candrikä-kiraëa-mätram etat vta
surendra-muni-puìgavaiù sahacarair hi brahmädibhiù

kta sakala-nirmmala gopa-gopé-nämämtais
tad apsara kathädika manuja-bhävam eva sphuöam 19

yat - which; aìghri-nakha - toenails; candrikä-kiraëa - moon-beam; mätram simply; etat - this; vtam - sought after; sura-indra - and the best of the gods;
muni-puìgavaiù - by the powerful sages; saha-caraiù - with their companions; hi
- indeed; brahmä-ädibhiù - headed by Brahmä; ktam - done; sakala-nirmalam fully spotless; gopa-gopé - the cowherds and milkmaids; näma-amtaiù - by the
nectarean names; tat - that; apsara - of the heavenly dancing girl; kathä - story;
ädikam - headed by; manuja-bhävam - human mood; eva - certainly; sphuöam manifest.
A single ray of Gauräìga's moon-like toenails is sought after by the foremost of
sages and the gods headed by Brahmä. Accepting the role of a human being, He
performed fully spotless pastimes while chanting the nectarean names of the Vrajagopas and gopés. Therein histories such as Çré Gadädhara's former life as an apsarä
were revealed.

Thus ends the Fifteenth Sarga entitled "A Description of the Ecstatic Moods
of the Gopés as Bhakti-Yoga," in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

[p.326]
* * *
Sixteenth Sarga
sarvva-çakti-prakäçaù
Lord Gaura Reveals All Potencies

präviçat tad anu daëòa-dharo 'grataù / pürëa-candra-sadço haridäsaù
kérttana kuru harer iti vädé / bodhayas tri-jagaté paritaptäm 1
präviçat - he entered; tat anu - after that; daëòa-dharaù - holding a staff;
agrataù - before; pürëa-candra-sadçaù - like the full moon; hari-däsaù - the
exemplary teacher of the holy names; kértanam - chanting; kuru - please make;
hareù - of Hari; iti - thus; vädé - speaking; bodhayan - enlightening; tri-jagatém the three worlds; paritaptäm - suffering much.
(The drama performance continued:) Haridäsa, then appeared like the full moon
before the assembly of the Lord and His bhaktas. Bearing a staff, he addressed them
as follows, Perform Çré Hari-kértana and thus enlighten the living beings of the three
worlds, who are now burning in the fire of sense enjoyment.

tasya tad-vacanam abja-mukhasya / sannipéya hitäìga-ruhäs te
vaiëavä nantur udgata-netra- / väribhis timita-vigraha-bhäjaù 2
tasya - his; tat-vacanam - his words; abja-mukhasya - of the lotus-faced;
sannipéya - drinking intensely; hita - thrilled; aìga-ruhäù - hairs; te - they;
vaiëaväù - the devotees of Viñëu; nantuù - they (sang) and danced; udgata coming forcefully out; netra - eyes; väribhiù - by the waters; timita - wet; vigraha
- body; bhäjaù - experiencing.

[p.327]
After drinking through their thirsty ears the words of Haridäsa, whose face
resembled a blossoming lotus, the vaiñëavas began to sing and dance, their hairs
thrilled with rapture, and their bodies became wet from tears which spurted
forcefully from their eyes.

präviçat tad anu vaiëava-räjo / räjamäna iva tigma-maréciù
äkipann iva sudhä iva käntim / abja-cäru-vadanaù sa mahätmä 3
präviçat - he entered; tat anu - afterwards; vaiëava-räja - the king of vaiñëavas;
räjamänah - shining; iva - like; tigma-maréciù - the sun; äkipan - casting; iva like; sudhäm - nectar; iva - like; käntim - luster; abja - lotus; cäru - beauty;
vadanaù - face; sah - he; mahä-ätmä - great soul.
Then the great soul and king of the vaiñëavasAdvaita _cärya entered . He shone
with fierce brilliance like the sun, His attractive lotus face radiating nectar and
splendor.

éçvarasya kalayä tu vijäto / 'dvaita-varyya itarair anugaiù saù
änanarta hari-päda-rasärdro / matta-siha iva durddamanäntaù 4
éçvarasya - of the Supreme Lord; kalayä - by a plenary portion; tu - indeed;
vijäta - originated; advaita-varya - the avatära of a devotee; itarai - by the
subordinate; anugaiù - by the followers; saù - he; änanarta - He danced towards;
hari-päda - the feet of Hari; rasa - mellows; ärdra - tender; matta-siha maddened lion; iva - like; durdamana - indomitable; antaù - death.
He is a plenary portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His heart is
soft because of absorption in the flavors of Çré Hari's feet. Together with His
servants and disciples, He danced towards them like a maddened lion or
indomitable death.

ta vilokya muditair nayanäbjaiù / sädhavaù sadasi tasya
mukhendum
adbhuta papur avaçya hdas te / prema-sägara-raseu nimagnäù 5

[p.328]
tam - Him; vilokya - glancing; muditaih - with glad; nayana-abjaiù - with lotus
eyes; sädhavaù - the saints; sadasi - in the assembly; tasya - his; mukha-indum moon-like face; adbhutam - wonderful; papu - they drank; avaçya spontaneously; hda - hearts; te - they; prema-sägara - ocean of love; raseu - in
the mellows; nimagnäù - immersed.
The saints of that assembly gladly gazed upon Him, and drinking deeply of His
marvellous moon-like face with its lotus-petal eyes, their hearts became
spontaneously immersed in the manifold mellows of the prema-sägara.

gopé-veça-dharako baladevaù / präviçad rasa-viçea-vinodé
präëa-nätha-kara-pallava-pradhto / nayana-väri-paripürëa-sudehaù 6
gopé-veça-dharaka - wearing the attire of an elderly milkmaid; baladevaù - the
mighty Lord; präviçat - entered; rasa-viçea - specific mellow; vinodé - enjoyer;
präëa-nätha - Lord of the life; kara-pallava - petal-like fingers; pradhta - clasped;
nayana-väri - tears; paripürëa - overbrimming; su-dehaù - excellent body.
Nityänanda Baladeva, who takes especial delight in rasa, then entered the stage,
attired as an elderly gopé. In His hand He held the petal-like fingers of the Lord of
His life, and His beautiful body was fully flooded by tears.

väsudeva-kta-veça-viçeaù / präviçat sa bhagavän amtäçuù
tapta-käïcana-vapuù kanakädri- / çìga-räja iva jaìgama-veçaù 7
väsudeva - the son of Vasudeva; kta - made; veça - attire; viçeaù - specific;
präviçat - entered; sa - He; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; amta-açuù - He
whose rays are like nectar; tapta-käïcana-vapuù - a body colored like molten
gold; kanaka-adri - golden mountain; çìga-räja - the king of mountains; iva like; jaìgama-veçaù - in the dress of a traveller.

[p.329]
Then entered Bhagavän Caitanya Väsudeva. With his body complexion like molten
gold and his effulgence like the nectar-radiating moon, it appeared as if Meru, the
king of mountains, was somehow walking. He was suitably attired for His special
mission of teaching the ecstasy of gopé-rasa.

gopikeva vara-kaïculi-vakä / çaìkha-kaìkaëa-dharo 'ruëa-vastraù
nüpureëa nuta-päda-su-padmaù / sükma-madhya-vapuä sa nanarta
8
gopikä - a milkmaid; iva - like; vara-kaïculi - beautiful bodice; vakäù - chest;
çaìkha - conch; kaìkaëa - bracelets; dhara - wearing; aruëa-vastraù - saffron
garment; nüpureëa - with anklebells; nuta - praised; päda-su-padmaù - sweet
lotus feet; sukma - slender; madhya - middle; vapuä - with His body; sa - He;
nanarta - danced.
Like a gopé He wore a beautiful bodice on His chest, bracelets made of tiny
conchells, and a saffron dress around His very slender waist. He danced with sweet
lotus feet celebrated by tinkling anklebells.

jyotiätimilite bhuvas tale / dehajena n-hareù kte tadä
divya-gandha-pavanaù sa kampayan / mälaté malayajo vavau
muhuù 9
jyotiä - by the light; atimilite - covered; bhuva tale - on the planet earth; dehajena - from the body; n-hareù - of Hari in human form; kte - done; tadä - then;
divya-gandha-pavanaù - the divinely perfumed breeze; sa - He; kampayan caused to shake; mälatém - jasmine; malaya-ja - born in the Malaya Hill; vavau blew; muhuù - repeatedly.
The earth became immersed in the luster from Nåhari's body, and a divinely
perfumed breeze blew from the Malaya Hill again and again, causing the mälati
flowers to tremble.

[p.330]
kheda-çoka-kalayävidito 'pi / pürëa-maëòala iva pracakäçe
candramä divi sureça-maheça- / loka-päla-sa-gaëävta-märge 10
kheda - depression; çoka - grief; kalayä - by parts of; avidita - unknown; api although; pürëa-maëòala - the complete moon; iva - like; pracakäçe - He
revealed; candramä - by the moon; divi - in the heavens; sura-éça - Indra; mahäéça - Çiva; loka-päla - deities of the planets; sa-gaëa - with their hosts; ävta overcast; märge - on the path.
As the full moon shines to illuminate the paths of the heavens for Indra, Çiva and
the various planetary deities, the moon of Gaura shone and dispelled any trace of
depression or grief.

kérttana sa bhagavän ati-tejä / narttana ca muditaù pracakära
bhävam äçu vidadhe kamaläyäù / känti-bhäva-bhd vapuo 'syäù 11
kértanam - chanting; sa - He; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; ati-tejä - having
great potency; nartanam - dancing; ca - and; muditaù - joyous; pracakära performed; bhävam - ecstasy; äçu - suddenly; vidadhe - enacted; kamaläyäù - of
the goddess of fortune; känti - beauty; bhäva - ecstasy; bht - bearing; vapua - of
the beautiful body; asyäù - of Her.
The Lord began to blissfully sing and dance with much energy. Then, replete with
ecstasy and loveliness, He played the part of the goddess of fortune.

tatra deva-gha-madhya-gatäyäù / këa-divya-vapuaù pratimäyäù
sannikaram upastya vinéto / navya-vastra-daçayä kusumäni 12
vigrahäd apanayan punar eva / tatra täni nidadhe su-manäsi
prema-bhakti-rasa-pürita-koöi- / mät-sneha-paripürito 'bhavat 13
tatra - there; deva-gha-madhya - in the midst of the temple; gatäyäù - of her
who had gone; këa; divya-vapuaù - the divine form; pratimäyäù - of the Deity;

[p.331]
sannikaram - drawing close; upastya - approaching; vinéta - humbly; navya new; vastra - a cloth; daçayä - with the hem; kusumäni - flowers; vigrahät - from
the sacred form; apanayan - taking back; puna - again; eva - alone; tatra - there;
täni - them; nidadhe - she accepted; su-manäsi - jasmine; prema-bhakti devotional love; rasa-pürita - filled with mellows; koöi - millions; mät - mothers;
sneha - affection; paripürita - completely full; abhavat - it became.
The goddess humbly approached the Deity form of Këa in the middle of the
temple. She took some jasmine flowers from the Deity with the hem of her new säré,
and as she offered them again to Him, Her heart became filled to overflowing with
prema-bhakti-rasa, like the affection of ten million mothers.

tä striya pramuditäù parinemuù / sastavena çrutibhiù pratuöuvuù
äjïayä sakala-deva-mayasya / tasya höa-manaso dvija-mukhyäù 14
täm - that; striyam - woman; pramuditäù - very jubilant; parinemuù - they
bowed down very low; sastavena - with a hymn; çrutibhiù - from the çruti çästras
(Vedas); pratuöuvuù - they praised; äjïayä - by the order; sakala-deva-mayasya who is the sum total of all gods; tasya - His; höa-manasa - exultant hearts; dvijamukhyäù - eminent brähmaëas.
Then, by the order of the Lord, who is the sum total of all the gods, the eminent
brähmaëas very jubilantly offered their homage to that lady. They praised her with
exultant hearts, singing a hymn from the Vedas.

tat-kaëät punar abhüt bhagavatyäù / sarvva-çakti-mayatä tu
vahatyäù
bhävam eva su-janä mudam äpus / tuöuvuù sura-ktaiù stava-räjaiù
15
tat-kaëät - at that moment; puna - later; abhüt - it was; bhagavatyäù - of the
goddess Durgä; sarva-çakti-mayatäm - the quality of having all potencies; tu indeed; vahatyäù - who conveyed; bhävam - ecstasy; eva - indeed; su-janä - the

[p.332]
good people; mudam - happiness; äpu - they attained; tuöuvuù - they praised;
sura-ktaiù - composed by the saints; stava-räjaiù - with exalted hymns.
A moment later, the Lord entered into the all-powerful mood of goddess Durgä.
The people became enlivened and offered praises by chanting excellent hymns
composed by the saints.

äsane samupaviçya su-klipte / devatä-pratikté punar äha
präviçan naöana-vékaëa-kämä / 'trägatäsmi bhavatä kutukena 16
äsane - on a seat; samupaviçya - sitting down; su-klipte - nicely carved; devatäpratikté - Personality of Godhead; puna - again; äha - He said; präviçan - entered;
naöana-vékaëa-kämä - desiring to see a dance; atra - here; ägatä - come; asmi - I
have; bhavatäm - of your honors; kutukena - because of eagerness.
Then seating Himself on a fine äsana, the Personality of Godhead in the form of the
goddess again spoke, "I have come here eager to see a dance performed by your
good selves."

dehi devi tava päda-yugäbje / prema-bhaktim iti te punar ucuù
abravéc ca mayi te yadi bhaktir / jäyate yadi vadiyati lokaù 17
cäëòa ea iti su-smita-vakträ / tän uväca tarhi te bhuvi nemuù
brähmaëäs tam anu sä hari-däsam / arka indu-sadça samagrahét 18
dehi - You must give; devi - O goddess; tava - your; päda-yuga-abje - at your
two feet; prema-bhaktim - devotional love; iti - thus; te - your; puna - again; ücuù they said; abravét - He said; ca - and; mayi - unto you; te - your; yadi - if; bhakti devotion; jäyate - it is born; yadi - if; vadiyati - it will say; lokaù - the world;
cäëòa - follower of Caëé (Durgä); ea - this; iti - thus; su-smita-vakträ - brightly
smiling face; tän - to them; uväca - He said; tarhi - then; te - they; bhuvi - on the
earth; nemuù - they bowed down; brähmaëä - those conversant with spirit; tam Him; anu - after; sä - she; hari-däsam; arka - sun; indu-sadçam - like the moon;

[p.333]
samagrahét - embraced.
The devotees again prayed, "O goddess, just bestow on us loving devotion to Your
lotus feet." With a laughing face, Mahäprabhu replied, "If love should awaken in
your hearts for Me, then all the people will say of you, `These are devotees of
goddess Caëé.'" Then the brähmaëas bowed down on the earth before Him as the
sun of Gaura embraced the moon of Haridäsa.

païca-häyena iväbhavat tadä / so 'pi tatra tad abhüd ati-citram
tatra ko 'pi samuväca muräri / dénam enam avalokaya devi 19
païca-häyena - five years old; iva - like; abhavat - he became; tadä - then; sa
api - that same person; tatra - there; tat - that; abhüt - it was; ati-citram - very
wonderful; tatra - then; ka api - anyone; samuväca - addressed; murärim - the
enemy of Mura; dénam - lowly; enam - him; avalokaya - please look; devi - O
goddess.
Then a most amazing thing occurred. Haridäsa became like a little boy of five
years, and he addressed Caitnya Muräri, "O goddess, kindly cast Your glance of
mercy upon this lowly fellow."

tan niçamya nayanäbja-yugena / prema-toyam asjat karuëärdrä
tat-kaëät samanubhüya ca sä tat- / püjana nija-janasya su-veçä 20
tat - that; niçamya - hearing; nayana-abja-yugena - by His two lotus eyes;
prema-toyam - water of love; asjat - He released; karuëä-ärdrä - tender with
mercy; tat-kaëät - at that moment; samanubhüya - perceiving; ca - and; sä - She;
tat-püjanam - the worship of the Lord; nija-janasya - of His own man; su-veçä in fine dress.
The moment He heard this, the Lord who was attired in the attractive dress of the
goddess of fortune, His heart softened with compassion, considered all the
devotional service which His dear devotee had performed, and tears of love fell from
His lotus eyes.

[p.334]
stanyam äçu vidadhe sura-varyän / päyayann asura-vähiné-ripuù
ta vilokya karuëärdra-su-neträm / éçvara nija-janä mudam äpuù 21
stanyam - breast milk; äçu - quickly; vidadhe - bestowed; sura-varyän - to the
godly men; päyayan - made drink; asura-vähiné-ripuù - the enemy of the
demoniac armies; tam - Him; vilokya - glancing; karuëä - mercy; ärdra - tender;
su-neträm - fine eyes; éçvaram - the Supreme Lord; nija-janä - His personal
associates; mudam - happiness; äpuù - attained.
Then the Lord, who is known as the annihilator of the armies of the demons, gave
breast milk to those most exalted of godly men. And as they gazed upon the
Supreme Lord, whose beautiful eyes were filled with tender compassion, His
associates felt joy.

tat-käëäd bhagavataù punar eva / bhäva éçitur abhüd avalokya
nemur ärdra-nayanä jagad-éça / tuöuvuç ca muditä dvija-varyäù 22
tat-käëät - at that moment; bhagavataù - of the Lord; puna - again; eva indeed; bhäva - ecstasy; éçitu - of the master; abhüt - it became; avalokya beholding; nemu - they bowed down; ärdra-nayanä - having moist eyes; jagatéçam - the controller of the material worlds; tuöuvu - they praised; ca - and;
muditä - enlivened; dvija-varyäù - the eminent twice-born men.
At that moment, Gaura's mood as the reservoir of all opulence and the Supreme
Master arose once more. Perceiving this, those eminent twice-born men bowed down
and offered praises with moistened eyes and enlivened hearts to the Lord of the
cosmic manifestation.

eva ninäya bhagavän sakalä niçä sa / prätar jagäma nija-mandiram
indu-vaktraù
hasta-ghéta-vara-daëòa iväti-caëòa- / raçmeù çikheva n-harir dadçe
janena 23

[p.335]
evam - thus; ninäya - passing; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sakaläm - all;
niçäm - night; sa - He; präta - at dawn; jagäma - He went; nija-mandiram - to His
own home; indu-vaktraù - face like the moon; hasta-ghéta - taking in the hand;
vara-daëòa - a fine staff; iva - like; ati-caëòa - very fierce; raçmeù - having rays;
çikhä - flame; iva - like; n-hari - Çré Hari in His human-like form; dadçe - He was
seen; janena - by the people.
Thus He passed the whole night, and at dawn the Lord whose face was lustrous
like the moon went to His home, holding a fine staff in His hand. The people saw
Nåhari like a brilliant flame.

Thus ends the Sixteenth Sarga entitled "Lord Gaura Reveals All Potencies," in
the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Seventeenth Sarga
çré-muräri-gupta-anuçäsanam
Muräri Gupta Advises Gaura Hari

çré-candra-çekharäcäryya-ratna-vätyä mahä-prabhuù
nanarta yatra taträsét / tejas tattva-vad adbhutam 1
çré-candra-çekhara-äcärya-ratna - the expansion of the moon-god; vätyäm - in
the home; mahä-prabhuù - the great Master; nanarta - He danced; yatra - where;
tatra - then; asét - it was; teja - power; tattva-vat - practically adbhutam wonderful.
Thereafter Mahäprabhu danced in saìkértana at the home of Candra Çekhara, the
jewel among äcäryas, and there He factually exhibited amazing powers.

[p.336]
saptäha çétala candra-tejasä sadça hareù
caïcaleva su-duprekya / cittähläda-kara çuci 2
sapta-aham - for seven days; çétalam - cool; candra-tejasä - by the power of the
moon; sadçam - like; hareù - of Hari; caïcala - lightning; iva - like; su-duprekyam
- difficult to see; citta - heart; ähläda-karam - enlivening; çuci - pure.
For one week, Hari created a coolness like the full moon. His form like lightning
was difficult to look upon, but He was pure and enlivening to the heart.

ye ye taträgatä lokä / ücus tatra katha dçoù
unmélane na çaktä sma / vidyud-vat prekya bhütale 3
ye ye - all who; tatra - there; ägatä - came; lokä - the people; ücu - they said;
tatra - there; katham - how; dçoù - of the eyes; unmélane - opening; na - not;
çaktä - able; sma - indeed; vidyut-vat - like lighning; prekya - looking; bhü-tale on the earth.
Everyone who came there declared, "How is it that we are unable to open our eyes?
Indeed, when we look at the world around us, it appears that there is lightning
flashing everywhere."

tat çrutvä vaiëaväù sarvve / haräd ücur na kiïcana
jänanto 'pi mahä-bhägä / bahir-mukha-janän prati 4
tat - they; çrutvä - hearing; vaiëaväù - the servants of Viñëu; sarve - all; harät out of joy; ücu - they said; na - not; kiïcana - any; jänanta - knowing; api although; mahä-bhägä - very fortunate; bahir-mukha - outside-faced,
materialistic; janän - people; prati - towards.
When they heard these statements, all the fortunate vaiñëavas felt joy, and
although they knew the reality of the situation, they said nothing to the materialistic

[p.337]
people.

atha papraccha çréväso / bhagavanta jagad-gurum
kaläv eva harer näma-kérttana samudähtam 5
atha - then; papraccha - he inquired; çréväsa - the pure devotee; bhagavantam the Lord; jagat-gurum - the guru of the all sentient beings; kalau - in the age of
Kali; eva - only; hare - of Hari; näma-kértanam - celebration of the names;
samudähtam - told.
Then Çréväsa inquired from the illustrious guru of all beings, "You say that the
chanting of hari-näma-saìkértana is the sole means for self-realization in kali-yuga?

ki satyädi-yugasyästi / phala nyüna kathaïcana
tat çrutvä bhagavän präha / çrüyatä kathayämi te 6
kim - is?; satya-ädi - the age of truth and so on; yugasya - of the age; asti there is; phalam - the benefit; nyünam - inferior; kathaïcana - in any way; tat that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; präha - He said; çrüyatäm - now hear;
kathayämi - I shall tell; te - to you.
"Are the benefits achieved through hari-näma inferior in any way to those of the
other ages such as the age of Satya?" Hearing this, the Lord replied, "Listen
attentively as I tell you.

satye dharmasya pürëatväd / dhyänenaivopasädhyate
tat-phala yajïa-mätreëa / tretäyä dväpare yuge 7
püjanena kalau päpair / na çaktäs te hariù svayam
näma-svarüpo bhagavän / ägatya çuçubhe prabhuù 8
satye - in the age of truth; dharmasya - of virtue; pürëatvät - because of
completeness; dhyänena - by meditation; eva - indeed; upasädhyate - it is

[p.338]
attained; tat-phalam - the fruit of self-realization; yajïa-mätreëa - simply by
ritualistic sacrifice; tretäyäm - in the age named Tretä; dväpare yuge - in the
Dväpara age; püjanena - by Deity worship; kalau - in the age of Kali; päpai - by
sinners; na - not; çaktä - capable; te - they; hariù - the remover of sin; svayam in person; näma-svarüpa - original form of the name; bhagavän - the Lord;
ägatya - coming; çuçubhe - shines; prabhuù - the Master.
"In Satya-yuga, when all men followed all the principles of dharma, realization of
one's self and one's relationship with the Supreme Lord could be achieved through
contemplative yoga. That me benefit was achievein the Tretä age simply through yaj
In the age of Dväpara, self-realization was achieved through worship of the Lord in
His Deity incarnation. In the age of Kali, the people are very sinful and are unable to
practice these other processes, therefore the illustrious Lord Hari, Master of the
cosmic manifestation, has personally advented in the brilliant form of Çré Näma.

ktädiu trayaù çaktyä / dhyäna-yajïärccanädayaù
däruëe ca kalau päpe / svayam evänupadyate 9
kta-ädiu - in the ages of Satya and so on; trayaù - three; çaktyä - practicable;
dhyäna-yajïa-arcana-ädayaù - meditation, sacrifice, Deity worship and so on;
däruëe - terrible; ca - but; kalau - in the age of quarrel; päpe - bad; svayam Himself; eva - indeed; anupadyate - attends.
"In the other ages headed by Satya, the three processes of meditation, fire sacrifice
and Deity worship were feasible. But in this terrible age of Kali, when all bad
qualities are in ascendence, Kåñëa Himself attends to the spiritual needs of the
conditioned souls."

tat çrutvä harito vipraù / çréväsaù paëòitottamaù
mene sarvva-puruärtha-sära çré-näma-maìgalam 10
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; harita - thrilled; vipraù - learned brähmaëa;
çréväsaù - the residence of Çré Bhakti; paëòita-uttamaù - transcendental scholar;
mene - he considered; sarva - all; purua-artha - goal of life for the embodied

[p.339]
being; säram - essential; çré-näma-maìgalam - the respendent and auspicious
holy name.
Hearing that with great gladness, Çréväsa, the transcendental scholar and
enlightened brähmaëa, understood that auspicious Çré Näma is the essential need
and goal of life for all beings.

hari-saìkértana ktvä / nagare nagare prabhuù
mlecchädén uddadhäräsau / jagatäm éçvaro hariù 11
hari-saìkértanam - the congregational chanting of the names of Hari; ktvä performed; nagare nagare - from town to town; prabhuù - the Master; mleccha those fallen from Vedic culture, Muslims and so forth; ädén - and so on;
uddadhära - delivered; asau - He; jagatäm - of the worlds; éçvara - Supreme
Lord; hariù - the remover of evil.
From town to town, Gaura Hari, the lord of all beings performed hari-saìkértana.
Thus hee delivered all people including the mlecchas.

ekadä bhagavän äha / netra-väribhir äplutaù
sthätu näha samartho 'smi / gacchämi mathurä purém 12
ekadä - once; bhagavän - the Lord; äha - said; netra-väribhi - by tears; äplutaù bathed; sthätum - to stay; na - not; aham - I; samartha - able; asmi - I am;
gacchämi - I am going; mathuräm purém - to the city of Mathurä.
Once Bhagavän Gaura, His body bathed by tears, declared, "I am unable to remain
at home. I shall depart for the city of Mathurä."

chittvä yajïopavéta sva / këa-viçlea-kätaraù
çrutvä tad-vacana tasya / präha vaidyo murärikaù 13
chitvä - breaking; yajïa-upavétam - sacred thread; svam - His; këa-viçlea-

[p.340]
kätaraù - afflicted by separation from Kåñëa; çrutvä - hearing; tat-vacanam these words; tasya - His; präha - he said; vaidya - the physician; murärikaù lowly Muräri.
The Lord then broke His sacred thread, feeling torment out of separation from
Kåñëa. Hearing Gauräìga's words, this lowly physician Muräri spoke as follows:

bhagavan sakala karttu / çäkto 'si sarvva-tattva-vit
gantu sthätu tvam äryeëa / tathäpi närhasi dhruvam 14
bhagavan - O Lord; sakalam - all; kartum- to do; säkta - able; asi - You are;
sarva-tattva-vit - the knower of all truths; gantum - to go; sthätum - to stay; tvam You; äryeëa - by godly principles; tathä api - still; na - not; arhasi - You should;
dhruvam - factually.
"O Lord, You know all truths and can do whatever You desire. You can go or You
can stay. However according to the _ryan principles you should not leave Your
home.

tvayä cet kriyate nätha / svätantryät sakalä janäù
svätantryeëa kariyanti / patiyanty açucau punaù 15
tvayä - by You; cet - if; kriyate - it is done; nätha - O Lord; svätantryät - by
Your independent nature; sakalä - all; janäù - people; svätantryeëa - in an
independent way; kariyanti - they will act; patiyanti - they will fall; açucau - in
an unclean state; punaù - again.
"He Nätha! If You act in this way due to your fully independent nature, all people
will follow Your example and by acting independently they will fall into an impure
condition.

etan matvä svaya täta / sväçramäd äçramäntaram
kartavya tu tvayä te ke / kathayantu mahattamäù 16

[p.341]
etat - this; matvä - considering; svayam- of Your own accord; täta - dear one;
sva-äçramät - from Your äçrama; äçrama-antaram - another äçrama; kartavyam it should be done; tu - indeed; tvayä - by You; te - they; ke - who; kathayantu they must speak; mahattamäù - the greatest souls.
"Dear Lord, You may consider that by Your self-sufficient nature You should
change from Your present äçrama to another one, but what will the great
transcendentalists say ?

kåtvaiva gamana te 'dya / kta syät sarvva-dehinäm
caitanya-rahitänä ca / ki tävat kathayämi te 17
ktvä - having done; eva - surely; gamanam - going; te - of You; adya - today;
ktam - done; syät - it may be; sarva-dehinäm - of all embodied beings; caitanyarahitänäm - who are devoid of consciousness; ca - and; kim - what?; tävat - so
long; kathayämi - I tell; te - to You.
"O Kåñëa, if You leave today, all embodied beings may become bereft of
consciousness. What more can I can say to You?"

bhaktaiù saveöito nitya / nityänanda-samanvitaù
gadädhareëa gandhädyaiù / sevito bhakta-go hariù 18
tat çrutvä bhagaväs tüëé / bhütväsét prema-vihvalaù
këa-saìkérttanänanda-pürëa-manorathaù svayam 19
bhaktaiù - by the devotees; samveöita - surrounded; nityam - always;
nityänanda-samanvitaù - with Nityänanda; gadädhareëa - with Gadädhara;
gandha - fragrance; ädyaiù - headed by; sevita - served; bhakta-ga - going with
His devotees; hariù - the remover of evil; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän the Lord; tüëém - silent; bhütvä - being; asét - was; prema-vihvalaù overwhelmed by love; këa-saìkértana - the congregational chanting of Kåñëa's

[p.342]
names; änanda-pürëa - full of bliss; mana-rathaù - desire; svayam - spontaneous.
The Lord heard this, but because His heart was overwhelmed by love, He remained
silent, filled by spontaneous desires for the joys of Kåñëa-saìkértana. Continuously
surrounded by His devotees, and accompanied by Nityänanda, being served
offerings of scented oils and other pleasing articles by Gadädhara, Çré Hari was
known as bhakta-ga, one who is always connected with His devotees.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Sarga entitled "Muräri Gupta Advises Gaura Hari,"
in the Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eighteenth Sarga
sannyäsa-sütram
The Sannyäsa Mantra

tataù kiyad dine präha / bhagavän käryya-mäëuaù
svapne döo mayä kaçcid / ägatya brähmaëottamaù 1
tataù - then; kiyat dine - after a few days; präha - He said; bhagavän - the Lord;
kärya-mäëuaù - the duties of a man; svapne - in a dream; döa - seen; mayä - by
Me; kaçcit - a certain; ägatya - coming; brähmaëa-uttamaù - elevated brähmaëa.
After a few days, Bhagavän, who had accepted the duties of a human being, said,
"In a dream, I saw a certain exalted brähmaëa come to Me.

sannyäsa-mantra mat-karëe / kathayäm äsa su-smitaù
tat çrutvä vyathito rätrau / divä cäha virodimi 2
sannyäsa-mantram - the mantra for acceptance of sannyäsa; mat-karëe - in my

[p.343]
ear; kathayäm äsa - he spoke; su-smitaù - nicely smiling; tat - that; çrutvä hearing; vyathita - troubled; rätrau - at night; divä - by day; ca - and; aham
virodimi - I weep.
"Brightly smiling, he spoke the sannyäsa mantra into My ear. After hearing it I
became troubled, and thus I weep by day and night.

katha priya hari nätha / tyaktvänyad ucita mama
muräriù präha tat çrutvä / tan-mantre bhagavan svayam 3
aöé-samäsa manasä / vicintya tva sukhé bhava 4
katham - how; priyam - dear; harim - Hari; nätham - Lord; tyaktvä - having
given up; anyat - other; ucitam - suitable; mama - My; muräriù - the enemy of
Murä; präha - said; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; tat-mantre - in the sannyäsa
mantra, tat tvam asi; bhagavan - O Lord; svayam - by spontaneous nature; aöésamäsam - the sixth form of samäsa (joining of nouns in Sanskrit grammar) in
this case referring to the Mäyäväda sannyäsa-mantra, tat tvam asi); manasä - in
mind; vicintya - pondering; tvam - You; sukhé - happy; bhava - be.
"How can I abandon Çré Hari, the Lord of My life? No one else is suitable for Me?"
Hearing this, Muräri replied, "He Bhagavän, You are Yourself the original Supreme
Lord, You can contemplate the sannyäsa-mantra - `tat tvam asi' - in terms of the
sixth form of Sanskrit compound words. Thus the meaning will become, `You are
His (Kåñëa's),' Be happy!"

tatroväca prabhur väca / tathäpi khidyate manaù
çabda-çaktyä kariyämi / kim ity uktvä ruroda saù 5
tatra - there; uväca - He said; prabhu - Master; väcam - words; tathä api - still;
khidyate - it is depressed; manaù - mind; çabda-çaktyä - by the power of
transcendental sound; kariyämi - I shall do; kim - what?; iti - thus; uktvä saying; ruroda - He wept; saù - He.

[p.344]
Then the Master spoke, "My mind is still depressed. What shall I accomplish by
the power of sound?" So saying, He wept.

tat çrutvä vyathitäù sarvve / këa-viçlea-kätaräù
yathä bhävini mäthure / viklavä vraja-su-bhrüvaù 6
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vyathitäù - disturbed; sarve - all; këa-viçlea separation from Kåñëa; kätaräù - agitated; yathä - as; bhävini - being; mäthure in Mathurä; viklavä - distressed; vraja-su-bhruvaù - the ladies of Vraja whose
eyebrows were moving.
Hearing this, all the bhaktas were perturbed. Their hearts felt anguish at the
thought of separation from Kåñëa Caitanya, like the enchanting-eyebrowed gopés of
Vraja when their beloved Kåñëa departed for Mäthurä.

tataù kiyad dine tatra / çrémat-keçava-bhäraté
nyäsé-çreöho mahä-tejä / dépyamäno yathä raviù 7
pürva-janmärjjitaiù puëyaiù / sarvvais tair ägataù svayam
tatra bhägya-vaçät këa / tapta-cämékara-prabham 8
tataù - then; kiyat dine - after a few days; tatra - then; çrémat-keçava-bhäraté the monk of the name Keçava Bhäraté; nyäsé-çreöha - the best of renunciants;
mahä-tejä - very powerful; dépyamäna - brilliant; yathä - like; raviù - sun; pürvajanma - in a previous birth; arjitaiù - earned; puëyaiù - by pious deeds; sarvai all; tai - by those; ägataù - came; svayam - in person; tatra - there; bhägya-vaçät by the influence of good fortune; këam - the all-attractive; tapta-cämé - molten
gold; kara - rays; prabham - luster.
Then, after several days, the very powerful sädhu Keçava Bhäraté arrived in
Navadvépa. Due to great renunciation, his person was brilliant like the sun. Due to
the pious credits earned by him in previous births, he could see Gaura Kåñëa, whose
bodily luster glittered like molten gold.

[p.345]
dadarça puëòarékäka / prema-vihvalita harim
dövä cänanda-pürëo 'sau / babhüva nyäsi-sattamaù 9
dadarça - he saw; puëòaréka-akam - lotus eyes; prema-vihvalitam overwhelmed by love; harim - the dispeller of evil; dövä - seeing; ca - and;
änanda-pürëa - filled with bliss; asau - he; babhüva - he was; nyäsi-sattamaù - the
best of renunciants.
Seeing the lotus-eyed Gaura Hari, whose heart was immersed in Kåñëa-prema, that
venerable renunciant became filled with joy.

nyäséçvara puro dövä / bhagavän éçvaraù svayam
premänanda-paripürëaù / samutthäya nanäma tam 10
nyäsi-éçvaram - the supreme master of renunciants; pura - before; dövä seeing; bhagavän - the Lord; éçvaraù - the Supreme Controller; svayam - Himself;
prema-änanda - joy of love; paripürëaù - utterly full; samutthäya - rising; nanäma
- He bowed; tam - to him.
When the Supreme Lord, whose entire being was fully saturated with premänanda,
observed that perfect master of renunciation in His presence. He rose from His seat
and bowed down before him.

këa-premämbu-dhäräbhiù / paréta ta vilokya saù
präha tuöo mahä-buddhiù / çrémat-keçava-bhäraté 11
këa-prema-ambu - of tears of love for Kåñëa; dhäräbhiù - by streams; parétam covered; tam - Him; vilokya - looking; saù - He; präha - said; tuöa - satisfied;
mahä-buddhiù - very intelligent; çrémat-keçava-bhäraté.
When the highly perceptive Keçava Bhäraté saw that Gaura's form was flooded by
streams of tears of prema, his heart felt satisfied and he addressed the Lord as

[p.346]
follows:

tva çuko vätha prahläda / iti me niçcitä matiù
ki vä tva bhagavän säkäd / éçvaraù sarvva-käraëam 12
tvam - You; çuka - Çukadeva Gosvämé, the speaker of Çrémad Bhägavatam; vä or; atha - else; pra-hläda - the highly joyful, the child-saint; iti - thus; me - my;
niçcitä - determined; matiù - opinion; kim vä - or whether?; bhagavän - the
Supreme Lord; säkät - directly; éçvaraù - the Supreme Controller; sarvakäraëam - the cause of everything.
"Either You are Çukadeva or else Prahläda - this is my determined opinion. Or, can
You be the all-opulent Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Lord and cause of all
causes?"

tat çrutvä vyathito näthaù / praçasä svä mahä-matiù
ruroda dvi-guëa prema-väri-dhärä-pariplutaù 13
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vyathita - disturbed; näthaù - the Lord; praçasäm praise; sväm - Himself; mahä-matiù - great intellect; ruroda - He cried; dvi-guëam
- twice as powerfully; prema-väri-dhärä - showers of the water of love;
pariplutaù - soaked.
Hearing such high praise offered to Himself, the Lord became agitated, and
weeping with redoubled strength He became drenched by currents of tears of prema.

tataù proväca ta dövä / vismito nyäsi-sattamaù
bhagavanta bhavän këa / éçvaro nätra saçayaù 14
tataù - then; proväca - he said; tam - Him; dövä - seeing; vismita - mystified;
nyäsi-sattamaù - exalted renunciant; bhagavantam - the Lord; bhavän - Your
grace; këa; éçvara - the Supreme Master; na - not; atra - here; saçayaù - doubt.

[p.347]
Observing these extraordinary devotional symptoms, that exalted renunciant was
astonished, and he asserted, "Your grace, You are Çré Kåñëa, the supreme Master of
this cosmic manifestation. Of this there can be no doubt."

ätma-praçasä mahaté / çrutvä vaiklavyam ävahan
natvä ta nyäsinä çreöha / jagäma nija-mandiram 15
ätma-praçasäm - self-glorification; mahatém - great; çrutvä - hearing;
vaiklavyam - despondency; ävahan - feeling; natvä - bowing down; tam - to that;
nyäsinam - renunciant; çreöham - best; jagäma - He went; nija-mandiram - to His
own home.
Çré Çacénandana felt despondent when he heard himself so greatly glorified, , and
after offering obeisances to the great sannyäsé, He departed for His own home.

nyäsa karttu manaç cakre / tyaktvä sva-gåham ddhimat
bhagavän sarvva-bhütänä / pävanaù çré-niketanaù 16
nyäsam - renunciation; kartum - to do; mana cakre - He made His mind up;
tyaktvä - giving up; sva-gåham - His home; ddhimat - prosperous; bhagavän - the
Lord; sarva-bhütänäm - of all beings; pävanaù - the purifier; çré-niketanaù - the
shelter of the goddess of fortune.
Then that person who purifies the hearts of all-living beings, who is the reservoir
of all opulence, of limitless beauty, wealth, knowledge, strength, fame, and
renunciation, and who is the shelter for the goddess of fortune, determined to
renounce His prosperous home.

tato mukundaù proväca / vaiëavän bho dvijottamäù
paçya nätha jagad-yoni / yävad aträvatiöhate 17
tata - then; mukundaù - Mukunda Datta; proväca - declared; vaiëavän - to the
vaiñëavas; bho - Oh!; dvija-uttamäù - O eminent twice-born men; paçya - please
look; nätham - at the Lord; jagat-yonim - the cause of the cosmic manifestation;

[p.348]
yävat - so long; atra - here; avatiöhate - He remains.
Then Mukunda Datta announced to the vaiñëavas, "Noble twice-born men! For as
long as He remains here, look to your full satisfaction upon Çré Nätha, the source of
this cosmic manifestation.

gamiyati kiyat käle / tyaktvä geha jagad-guruù
sarvve te vyathitäù çrutvä / vacana tasya dhémataù 18
gamiyati - He will go; kiyat käle - after a brief time; tyaktvä - having given up;
geham - home; jagat-guruù - the spiritual guide for the cosmos; sarve - all; te they; vyathitäù - distressed; çrutvä - hearing; vacanam - statement; tasya - his;
dhé-mataù - of that intelligent person.
"After a short time the jagad-guru will give up His home and depart." When they
heard this statement from that discerning person, the hearts of all the Gaura-bhaktas
became very agitated.

tataù proväca bhagavän / çréväsa dvija-puìgavam
bhavatäm eva premärthe / gamiyämi dig-antaram 19
tataù - then; proväca - spoke; bhagavän - the Lord; çréväsa - the pure devotee;
dvija-puìgavam - chief of the twice-born; bhavatäm - of your good selves; eva surely; prema-arthe - for the sake of love; gamiyämi - I shall go; dik-antaram - to
another country.
Then the Lord spoke to Çréväsa, the bull among the twice-born, "In order to
increase the love that all you great souls bear for Me, I am now leaving for another
country.

sädhubhir nävam äruhya / yathä gatvä dig-antaram
artham änéya bandhubhyo / déyate tad aha punaù 20

[p.349]
sädhubhi - by good men; nävam - boat; äruhya - mounting; yathä - as; gatvä going; dik-antaram - another country; artham - wealth; änéya - bringing;
bandhubhya - to the friends; déyate - is given; tat - that; aham - I; punaù - also.
"In the same way that gentlemen sometimes board a boat and journey to another
country, later bringing wealth back for their friends, so shall I.

dig-antarät samänéya / däsyämi prema-santatim
yayä sarvva-surärädhya / çré-këa paripaçyasi 21
dik-antarät - from another country; samänéya - bringing; däsyämi - I shall give;
prema-santatim - uninterrupted flow of prema; yayä - by which; sarva-sura - all
the gods; ärädhyam - worshipable; çré-këam - the all-attractive; paripaçyasi - you
fully behold.
"From that other country I shall send an uninterrupted flow of prema so that you
may fully behold Çré Kåñëa, the worshipable Deity of all gods."

punaù proväca ta çrutvä / çréväsaù çré-hari prabhum
tvayä virahito nätha / katha sthäsyämi jévitaù 22
punaù - again; proväca - he said; tam - to Him; çrutvä - hearing; çréväsaù; çréharim - the dispeller of sin; prabhum - the Master; tvayä - by You; virahita separation; nätha - O Lord; katham - how?; sthäsyämi - shall I remain; jévitaù alive.
After listening to the words of Çré Hari, Çréväsa replied to , "He Nätha! How shall I
continue to live in Your separation?"

tat çrutvä bhagavän präha / tava devälaye svayam
nitya tiöhämi viprendra / na citte vismaya kuru 23
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; präha - He said; tava - your;

[p.350]
deva-älaye - in the temple; svayam - in person; nityam - eternally; tiöhämi - I
stay; vipra-indra - best of enlightened persons; na - not; citte - in your mind;
vismayam - bewilderment; kuru - make.
Hearing this, Bhagavän said, "O best of enlightened men, I reside eternally within
your temple. Do not create some perplexity in your mind."

tasya tad-vacana çrutvä / vismito 'bhüd dvijarabhaù
éçvaraù sarvva-savyäpé / kasyäya varttate vaçe 24
tasya - His; tat-vacanam - words of Hari; çrutvä - hearing; vismita - wonder;
abhüt - there was; dvija-åabhaù - the best of brähmaëas; éçvaraù - the Supreme
Lord; sarva-savyäpé - all-pervading; kasya - of whom?; ayam - this; vartate exists; vaçe - in control.
Hearing these words from Gaura Hari, that best of the twice-born felt baffled, and
he thought, "He is the all-pervasive Supreme Lord. Who is capable of controlling
him?"

tatra çré-haridäsena / särddha säya gato hariù
muräri-veçma käruëyät / so 'bhyagacchad dhareù padam 25
tatra - then; çré-haridäsena - with Haridäsa; särdham - in the company of;
säyam - at eventide; gata - went; hariù; muräri-veçma - to the house of Muräri;
käruëyät - out of mercy; sa - He; abhyagacchat - he went; hareù - of Hari; padam to the feet.
Then at dusk, out of kindness Çré Hari accompanied by Haridäsa went to Muräri's
home. At once Muräri fell at the Lord's feet.

natväsanam upänéya / dattvä santuöa-mänasaù
haridäsa praëamyätha / sannikare sthitaù svayam 26

[p.351]
natvä - after bowing down; äsanam - seat; upänéya - leading; dattvä - giving;
santuöa-mänasaù - with a satisfied mind; hari-däsam - the teacher of the process
for chanting the names of Hari; praëamya - bowing down; atha - then; sannikare
- nearby; sthitaù - situated; svayam - himself.
After offering respectful obeisances to the Lord. With a satisfied mind, Muräri led
Him to a seat. He also bowed to the feet of Haridäsa and then situated himself
nearby Çré Gauräìga.

tam uväca dayämbhodhir / muräri çëu mad-vacaù
yad udässe sadä nitya / tad ittha kuru mad-vacaù 27
tam - him; uväca - He said; dayä-ambhodhi - the ocean of compassion; murärim
- to Muräri; çëu - please listen; mat-vacaù - My words; yat - whereby; udässe you are detached; sadä - always; nityam - regularly; tat - that; ittham - thus; kuru please do; mat-vacaù - My instructions.
That ocean of compassion said to Muräri, "Hear Me. Because you are always
detached, therefore you must strictly follow My instruction.

sävadhänena bhavatä / çrotavya vacana mama
upadeça dadämy adya / tava tat sampradhäryyatäm 28
sävadhänena - carefully; bhavatä - by yourself; çrotavyam - should be heard;
vacanam - words; mama - My; upadeçam - instruction; dadämi - I give; adya today; tava - of you; tat - that; sampradhäryatäm - fix your mind on.
"With great attention hear My words. Today I am giving you instructions. Just fix
your mind upon them.

advaitäcäryya-varyo 'sau / mahän vai sad-guëäçrayaù
éçvaräço 'sya sevä ca / kuru yatnena sädaram 29

[p.352]
advaita-äcärya; varya - the noble; asau - He; mahän - great; vai - certainly; satguëa-äçrayaù - the abode of pure qualities; éçvara-äça - the plenary portion of
the Supreme Lord; asya - His; seväm - service; ca - and; kuru - perform; yatnena with endeavor; sa-ädaram - with respect.
"The great and noble Advaita _cärya is the plenary portion of Mahä Viëu, and the
shelter of all pure qualities. Therefore respectfully render Him assistance with full
endeavor.

ity eva jïäpito guhyo / mayä tvat-sukha-siddhaye
ity uktvä sa yayau devaù / svä puré bhakta-vatsalaù 30
iti - so; evam - thus; jïäpita - informed; guhya - confidential; mayä - by Me;
tvat-sukha-siddhaye - for the perfection of Your happiness; iti - thus; uktvä saying; sa - He; yayau - left; devaù - the Lord; sväm - own; purém - abode; bhaktavatsalaù - affectionate to His devotees.
"Thus have I made known to you this most confidential information, whereby you
can realize the perfectional stage of transcendental happiness." So saying, the Lord,
who is always affectionate to HIs bhaktas, departed for His home.

athäparä-dine gatvä / kaëöaka-grämam uttamam
sannyäsa ktavän këaù / çrémat-keçava-bhäratém 31
atha - then; aparä-dine - on the next day; gatvä - going; kaëöaka-grämam - to
the town of Kaëöaka; uttamam - peerless; sannyäsam - complete renunciation;
ktavän - accomplished; këaù - Çré Caitanya; çrémat-keçava-bhäratém.
On the next day, GauraKåñëa went to the peerless town of Kaëöaka and awarded
sannyäsa to Çréman Keçava Bhäraté.

kåtärthayan guru ktvä / ta brahma-päragottamam 32
kta-arthayan - fulfilling; gurum - His guru; ktvä - making; tam - him; brahma-

[p.353]
päraga - attaining the ultimate message of the Vedas; uttamam - transcendental.
Accepting as His guru, He gave complete fulfillment to that person who was
conversant with all the Vedas.

iti hareç carita saçrëoti yaù / sapadi päpa-gaëa parihäya saù
viçati päda-tale n-harer labhed / atula-bhaktim asaìgam
anäryyataù 33
iti - thus; hare - of Hari; caritam - character; saçrëoti - attentively hears; yaù who; sapadi - instantly; päpa-gaëam - a host of sins; parihäya - completely gives
up; saù - he; viçati - he enters; päda-tale - at the soles of the feet; n-hare - of Hari
in His human-like form; labhet - he can attain; atula-bhaktim - incomparable
devotional service; asaìgam - detachment; anäryataù - from the ignoble.
He who hears attentively this narration of Çré Hari at once gives up the legion of
sins residing in the heart. Then accepting shelter at the soles of Çré Nåhari's feet,
that soul thus attains the incomparable boon of Hari-bhakti and detachment from all
that does not lead to Çré Hari's noble shelter.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Sarga entitled "The Sannyäsa Mantra," in the
Second Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
THIRD PRAKRAMA

* * *
First Sarga

[p.354]
kaëöaka-nagara-nägaré-vacanam
Words of the Intelligent Ladies of Kaëöaka Town

çrutvä hareù kathanam adbhutam aprapaïca / dämodaraù punar
uväca vara murärim
tat kathyatä katham asau bhagaväç cakära / nyäsa videça-gamana
puruottama ca 1
çrutvä - hearing; hareù - of Hari; kathanam - narrative; adbhutam - wonderful;
aprapaïcam - non-material; dämodaraù - Dämodara Paëita; puna - again; uväca said; varam - a boon; murärim - of Muräri Gupta; tat - that; kathyatäm - relate;
katham - how?; asau - He; bhagavän - the Lord; cakära - took; nyäsam - the
renounced order; videça-gamanam - going to foreign countries; purua-uttamam the city of the Supreme Person, Jagannätha Puré; ca - and.
After hearing the wonderful narrative of these transcendental pastimes of Çré Hari,
Dämodara requested further Muräri Gupta, "Please narrate how our all-opulent Lord
accepted the renounced order of life, and how He travelled to other lands as well as
the city of Puruñottama-deva.

dövä jagäma muni-saìga-nievitäni / térthäni käni ca manojïa-kpaù
puräëaù
çrutvä vaco dvija-varasya jagäda vaidyo / hdyä kathä çëu hareù
kathayämi tubhyam 2
dövä - seeing; jagäma - He went; muni-saìga-nievitäni - frequented by groups
of sages; térthäni - holy bathing places; käni - which?; ca - and; mana-jïa-kpaù whose mercy enchants the mind; puräëaù - primordial; çrutvä - hearing; vaca the words; dvija-varasya - of the best of the twice-born; jagäda - he spoke;
vaidya - the physician; hdyäm - enheartening; kathäm - tale; çëu - please hear;
hareù - of Hari; kathayämi - I am telling; tubhyam - to you.
"There are many térthas frequented and rendered service by sages. After that

[p.355]
primeval Personality, whose mercy enchants my mind, saw the city of Puruñottama,
which of them did He visit?" Hearing these requests from that best of the twiceborn, the physician replied, "Listen to me attentively as I narrate to you that history
which is enlivening to the heart."

taträçu çaktim atulä bhagavän dadätu / vaktu yathä mama bhavet
kuçalä suväëé
yasyädbhutä-çruti-sudhä-rasanaiù suväëé / yan-näma-sasmti-rasäd
vivaçä vimuktiù 3
tatra - therefore; äçu - instantly; çaktim - ability; atuläm - incomparable;
bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; dadätu - may He give; vaktum - to speak; yathä so; mama - my; bhavet - it may be; kuçalä - suitable; su-väëé - sublime words;
yasya - of whom; adbhutä - wonderful; çruti - ear; sudhä - nectar; rasanaiù - by
the tongues; su-väëé - fine words; yat - by whom; näma - name; sasmti - full
remembrance; rasät - from the taste; vivaçä - helplessly; vimuktiù - total
freedom.
May Bhagavän now endow me with unparalleled ability so that my words
delineating His glories may be very suitable and pleasing. May He give such sublime
words that award nectar to the tongues of those who recite and astound the ears of
those who hear. Words about Him are fully enriched by His names, and he who
remembers and relishes their sublime meaning automatically receives total freedom
from material bondage.

ta nitya-vigraham aja vara-hema-gaura / caitanya-devam amala
purua bhajämi
yat-päda-padma-nakhara-dyuti-raïjitena / cittena çuddha-manasaù
sahasä vidus tat 4
tam - Him; nitya-vigraham - eternal form; a-jam - unborn; vara - excellent;
hema - gold; gauram - radiant; caitanya - conscious Person; devam - the Divine;
amalam - flawless; puruam - Person; bhajämi - I adore; yat - by which; päda-

[p.356]
padma - lotus feet; nakhara - nails; dyuti - light; raïjitena - pleasing; cittena - by
the mind; çuddha-manasaù - of pure hearts; sahasä - at once; vidu - they know;
tat - that Absolute Truth.
I adore that unborn, eternal form of radiant pure golden hue, the faultless
personality of Çré Caitanya-deva. Those souls whose hearts are cleansed of material
desire and thus come to know that Supreme Truth at once are delighted within their
minds by the lustrous nails of His lotus feet.

brahma-svabhäva-bhagavad-bhajanämta ca / ta deva-vndaparivandita-pädam éòe
yat-päda-padma-makarandam ajasra pétvä / çré-çaìkaro 'pi
bhagavän anuräga-pürëaù 5
brahma-svabhäva - the nature of the Absolute Truth; bhagavat-bhajana worship of the Supreme Lord; amtam - immortal nectar; ca - and; tam - Him;
deva-vnda - the multitude of gods; parivandita-pädam - feet that are worshipped;
éòe - I worship; yat - from which; päda-padma - lotus feet; makarandam - flower
honey; ajasram - incessantly; pétvä - after drinking; çré-çam-kara - the causer of
peace (Çiva); api - even; bhagavän - all-opulent lord; anuräga-pürëaù - filled
with affection.
The Lord's feet are by nature transcendental and imbued with the immortal nectar
of His devotional service. I offer my prayers unto those feet, which are offered
elaborate worship by the host of devas. Even Bhagavän Çré Çaìkara incessantly sips
that flower-honey of His lotus feet and thus becomes ever more complete in
affectionate attachment for Çré Hari's service.

eva ca vaidyam upadiçya nijäçraya sa / gatvä sva-bhakta-gaëasevanajänuçaktyä
çäntaç ca sarva-rasikeçvara-gaura-candro / mugdhä ninäya rajané
ca tad utthito 'gät 6

[p.357]
evam - thus; ca - and; vaidyam - the physician; upadiçya - instructing; nija - His
own; äçrayam - shelter; sa - He; gatvä - going; sva-bhakta-gaëa - the group of His
devotees; sevana-ja - born of service; anuçaktyä - with His accompanying
potency; çänta - peaceful; ca - and; sarva-rasika-éçvara - the Lord of all
transcendental relishers; gaura-candra - one like a golden moon; mugdhäm bemused; ninäya - spent; rajaném - the night; ca - and; tat - that; utthita - arose;
agät - He went.
After the tranquil Lord Gaura Candra, the emperor of rasikas, had instructed the
physician whom he should accept as shelter, He returned to His home accompanied
by His potencies, who had accepted the form of His devoted servitors. Then after
passing that night in bemusement He rose up and departed.

uttéryya divya-taöiné bhagavän jagäma / jïätvätha khinna-manaso
dvija-varya-mukhyäù
vaiklavyam äpur atula ruruduç ca taptäù / çokärdditä vimanaso 'tikleça babhüvuù 7
uttérya - crossing; divya-taöiném - the divine river, Gaìgä; bhagavän - the Lord;
jagäma - He went; jïätvä - knowing; atha - then; khinna-manasa - dejected
hearts; dvija-varya-mukhyäù - chiefs of elevated brähmaëas; vaiklavyam perplexity; äpu - they attained; atulam - unparalleled; rurudu - they wept; ca and; taptäù - burned; çoka-ärditä - afflicted by grief; vimanasa - bereft of sense;
ati-kleça - very pained; babhüvuù - they were.
The illustrious Lord crossed the banks of the divine river and set forth. When the
chiefs of the twice-born heard this, their hearts sank as they felt unlimited
perplexity. Their minds became bereft of sense, and agitated by a burning sorrow,
they wept.

tän saptame 'hni parinaöa-tviän hy aväpa / çré-candra-çekharaguëäkara-ratna-väryyaù
äcäryya-ratna-vara-tapta-suvarëa-gauraù / käntyä kipann iva

[p.358]
sudhäkara-pürëa-çobhäm 8
tän - them; saptame ahni - on the seventh day; parinaöa-tviän - luster wholly
lost; hi - indeed; aväpa - he attained; çré-candra-çekhara; guëa-äkara-ratna - a
reservoir of all jewel-like good qualities; väryaù - best; äcärya-ratna - the jewel
teacher; vara - excellent; tapta - molten; su-varëa - fine color; gauraù - golden;
käntyä - by his luster; kñipan - casting; iva - like; sudhä-kara - nectar-maker (the
moon); pürëa-çobhäm - full of beauty.
After a week had passed, Çré Candra Çekhara _cärya-Ratna, whose luster was like
the hue of molten gold, returned to Navadvépa. There he met the devotees, whose
luster had wholly dissipated. By his effulgence, he appeared to cast even the
beautiful full moon into oblivion.
papracchur abja-nayanasya kathä-sudhä te / ta tän uväca tat kathayämi sarvvam
brüte sa gadgada-girä dvija-väryya-mukhyän / çré-candra-çekhara-dharämaraväryya-mukhyaù 9

papracchu - they inquired; abja-nayanasya - of the lotus-eyed Lord; kathäsudhäm - topic-nectar; te - they; tam - of Him; tän - them; uväca - he said; tat that; kathayämi - I am telling; sarvam - all; brüte - he said; sa - he; gadgada-girä with faltering words; dvija-värya-mukhyän - to the chiefs of the exalted
brähmaëas; çré-candra-çekhara-dhara - the holder of the moon crest; amaravärya-mukhyaù - the chief amongst the immortals.
All the bhaktas requested him to tell the nectar-topics of the lotus-eyed Lord. Çré
Candra Çekhara replied, "Yes, I shall tell you all about Him." Then that best of the
immortals addressed those illustrious heads of the brähmaëa community with a
choked voice.

gacchad vibhoù pathi narä vadana nirékya / netraiù papuù puruabhüaëa-gätra-çobhäm
nyäsäya tasya gamana ca punar viditvä / höä praëemur amum
ambuja-päda-yugmam 10

[p.359]
gacchan - going; vibhoù - of the great, sense-controlled; pathi - on the path;
narä - men; vadanam - face; nirékya - seeing; netraiù - with their eyes; papuù they drank; purua-bhüaëa - ornament of males; gätra-çobhäm - beautiful body;
nyäsäya - for renunciation; tasya - His; gamanam - going; ca - and; puna further; viditvä - knowing; höä - thrilled; praëemu - they bowed down; amum - to
Him; ambuja-päda-yugmam - pair of lotus feet.
"As the great and sense-controlled Lord walked the path, all of the people glanced
upon His countenance and through their eyes drank the beauty of His body, which
is the ornament of all male forms. When they learnied that He was on His way to
accept the sannyäsa order, they joyously offered their obeisances unto His lotus feet.

nanartta tasmin bhagavän mukundaù / premärdra-vakäù
pulakäcitäìgaù
höä jaguù këa-padäbja-géta / äcäryya-ratna-pramukhä mahattamäù
11
nanarta - He danced; tasmin - in that; bhagavän - the blessed Lord; mukundaù giver of liberation; prema-ärdra-vakäù - chest wet with tears of love; pulakaacita-aìgaù - body hairs thrilled; höä - joyous; jaguù - they sang; këa-pada-abja Kåñëa's lotus feet; gétam - song; äcärya-ratna-pramukhä - headed by _cärya
Ratna; mahattamäù - greatest of the great.
Then while the great souls led by _cärya Ratna sang songs of Kåñëa's lotus feet,
Gaura Mukunda began to dance. His chest became wet with tears of prema and His
hairs thrilled out of rapture.

tasmin kaëe kaëöaka-näma-puryä / samägatä brähmaëasajjanottamäù
näryyaç ca bäläç ca suhöa-vddhä / ghéta-hastä badhirändha-kubjäù
12

[p.360]
tasmin - at that; kaëe - moment; kaëöaka-näma - named Kaëöaka; puryä - in
the town; samägatä - assembled; brähmaëa - learned in spirit; sat-jana - godly
people; uttamäù - transcendentalists; närya - women; ca - and; bälä - boys; ca and; su-höa-vddhä - very joyous elders; ghéta-hastä - holding hands; badhira deaf; andha - blind; kubjäù - hunch-backed.
Meanwhile, in the town of Kaëöaka, many exalted saintly transcendentalists and
brähmaëas were assembled, as also were women, boys, very joyful elders, as well as
the deaf, the blind, and the hunch-backed, who arrived while holding the hands of
others.

striyaç ca käçcit dhta-pürëa-kumbhä / dhtärccanäù kaka-tateu
käçcit
käçcid vayasyä-dhta-bähu-yugmäù / sampürëa-garbhäs tvarita
saméyuù 13
striya - women; ca - and; käçcit - some; dhta-pürëa-kumbhä - bearing full
waterpots; dhta-arcanäù - holding paraphernalia for worship; kaka-tateu - on the
edge of their hips; käçcit - some; käçcit - some; vayasyä - friends; ädhta - held;
bähu-yugmäù - both arms; sampürëa-garbhä - fully pregnant; tvaritam - swiftly;
saméyuù - went together.
Some women held full waterpots on their heads, some held ingredients for worship
on the side of their hips, others who were fully pregnant walked swiftly arm-in-arm
with their companions.

papur hi santapta-hdas tu sarvvä / janärddanasyämbuja-vaktrasédhum
bälärka-miçra hi suvarëa-padmam / iväparä vékya suvismitäs täù 14
papu - they drank; hi - indeed; santapta-hda - with melting hearts; tu - verily;
sarvä - all; janärdanasya - of Jana-ärdana (one who inspires devotion in
mankind); ambuja-vaktra - lotus face; sédhum - nectar; bäla-arka - newly rising

[p.361]
sun; miçram - son of Jagannätha Miçra; hi - surely; su-varëa-padmam - a golden
lotus; iva - like; aparä - with no other object; vékya - looking; su-vismitä - very
astonished; täù - they.
All of them drank the elixir of Janärdana's lotus face with melting hearts. They
gazed with full absorption and great astonishment at that brähmaëa who resembled
the newly rising sun, as if He were some mystic golden lotus.

ücuç ca kasyäyam apürvva-darçanaù / samudyad-indupratimänanäbhaù
çubhäya lokasya bhaväya jäto / mäträsya puëyena dhtaù sva-garbhe
15
ücu - said; ca - and; kasya - whose?; ayam - this; apürva-darçanaù - never
before seen; samudyat - fully rising; indu - moon; pratima - like; änana - face;
äbhaù - luster; çubhäya - for the auspiciousness; lokasya - of the world; bhaväya for the cycle of birth and death; jäta - born; mäträ - by the mother; asya - of
this; puëyena - by pious; dhtaù - held; sva-garbhe - in her womb.
Talking among themselves, the people said, "O, who can be the father of this
Person, whom we have never seen before, the luster of whose face resembles the
rising full moon? In order that He might take birth and benefit souls entangled in
the cycle of birth and death, surely a saintly mother must have carried Him within
her womb."

asau kumäro jita-kämadevaù / käntyä girä nirjita-väk-patiù çubhaù
bhäryäsya kenäpi sukarmaëäbhüt / kenäpi kä vä virahätur
äsphuöam 16
asau - this; kumära - boy; jita-käma-devaù - Cupid is defeated; käntyä - by His
effulgence; girä - by His words; nirjita-väk-patiù - the eloquent Båhaspati is
defeated; çubhaù - virtuous; bhäryä - by the wife; asya - of Him; kenäpi - by some
way; su-karmaëä - by good works; abhüt - it has become; kenäpi - by some

[p.362]
means; kä vä - somehow; virahätu - of the separated party; äsphuöam - agitation.
"By His beauty this virtuous and heroic boy has defeated Kämadeva, and by His
speech even the eloquent Båhaspati lies vanquished. By some devout deed a woman
became His wife, but now by some ill-fated deed she is agitated by His separation!"

mätäsya putrasya mukha na dövä / jévaty ajévä bahu-duùkha-taptä
yathä hi këo mathurä didkur / gato vraja-sthäç ca babhüvur ärttäù
17
mätä - by a mother; asya - of this; putrasya - of the son; mukham - the face; na not; dövä - seeing; jévati - she lives; ajévä - not living; bahu-duùkha-taptä - burned
by many sorrows; yathä - as; hi - indeed; këa - all-attractive; mathuräm - to
Mathurä; didku - desiring to see; gata - went; vraja-sthä - staying in Vraja; ca and; babhüvu - became; ärtäù - afflicted.
"Not seeing any more the face of her son, His mother must live as if in death,
burned by many sorrows, like the residents of Vraja who felt pain, when Çré Kåñëa
departed from Våndävana, desiring to see Mathurä."

käçcid vidagdhäù sphuöam eva cähur / gopäìganä-bhäva-vibhävito
'sau
çré-nanda-putraù svayam äviräsét / sannyäsa-veçena svakäryyasädhakaù 18
käçcit - some women; vidagdhäù - intelligent; sphuöam - clear; eva - indeed; ca and; ähu - they said; gopa-aìganä - wives of the cowherds; bhäva - ecstatic
mood; vibhävita - feeling; asau - He; çré-nanda-putraù - the son of Nanda; svayam
- in Person; äviräsét - He has appeared; sannyäsa-veçena - in the garb of a
renunciant; svakärya-sädhakaù - executor of His own mission.
Certain intelligent women said, "It is clear that He is experiencing the ecstatic
moods experienced by the Vraja-gopés. Undoubtedly He is Nanda's son, who has

[p.363]
appeared to execute His mission in the garb of a sannyäsé."

eva vidhänyä bahudhä suväco / babhüvur anyonya-kathä
prasaìgaiù
mukha pibantyo na viduù sva-deha / viçvambharasyämbujalocanasya 19
evam vidhä - in this way; anyä - other; bahudhä - many; su-väca - sweet words;
babhüvu - they were; anyonya-kathä - discussion amongst one another;
prasaìgaiù - by the groups; mukham - face; pibantya - drinking; na - not; viduù they knew; sva-deham - own body; viçvambharasya - of Viçvambhara; ambujalocanasya - of the lotus-eyed.
Many other sweet words of this nature were spoken amongst those groups of
women, and as they drank the nectar of Viçvambhara's lotus face, they became
entirely forgetful of their own bodies.

Thus ends the First Sarga entitled "Words of the Intelligent Ladies of Kaëöaka
Town," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Second Sarga
sannyäça-äçrama-pävanam
Çré Gauräìga Purifies the Sannyäsa _çrama

ntyävasäne bhagavän ruroda / premnä hareù so'pi vibhinnadhairyyaù
dövä tadä tatra samägatä vai / rudanti te prema-jaläviläkäù 1

[p.364]
ntya-avasäne - at the end of dancing; bhagavän - the Lord; ruroda - wept;
premnä - out of love; hareù - of Hari; sa api - that same Person; vibhinnadhairyaù - composure shattered; dövä - seeing; tadä - then; tatra - there;
samägatä - assembled; vai - truly; rudanti - they wept; te - they; prema-jala - the
water of love; avila-akäù - imperceptibly.
At the culmination of His dancing the splendid Lord wept, His composure
shattered by love for Çré Hari. And all those who gathered there to observe the scene
also imperceptibly shed tears of love.

tataù samutthäya hariù sagadgada- / svareëa tän präha samägatän
janän
mä täta mätaç ca vidhehi sämprata / çubhäçio yena hari-smtiù syät
2
tataù - then; samutthäya - rising up; hariù - the dispeller of inauspiciousness;
sa-gadgada-svareëa - with choked voice; tän - them; präha - He said; samägatän assembled; janän - people; mäm - Me; täta - dear father; mäta - mother; ca - and;
vidhehi - may you bestow; sämpratam - now; çubha-äçia - auspicious blessings;
yena - whereby; hari-smtiù - remembrance of Hari; syät - it may be.
Then standing up, in a faltering voice Gaura Hari spoke to the assembled people ,
"Dear fathers and mothers, now kindly give Me your auspicious blessings, so that I
have remembrance of Çré Hari."

çrutväbhilajjäkulitä vivasträ / gatäs tatas te prarudanta eva
çré-këa-premä-paripürëa-dehä / babhüvuù sad-bhakti-rasena
pürëäù 3
çrutvä - hearing; abhilajjä - very ashamed; äkulitä - confounded; vivasträ denuded; gatä - went; tata - then; te - they; prarudanta - weeping profusely; eva indeed; çré-këa-premä - love for Çré Kåñëa; paripürëa - overbrimming; dehä bodies; babhüvuù - they became; sat-bhakti - pure devotion; rasena - by the

[p.365]
mellow; pürëäù - filled.
When the people heard these words, they sensed that their hearts had been
stripped naked and thus feeling ashamed and confounded, they wept profusely.
Then their hearts filled with sad-bhakti-rasa, and their bodies became overwhelmed
by the symptoms of Çré Kåñëa-prema

tän säntvayitvä nija-darçanämtaiù / sa gaura-candro bhagavän
jagäma
guror niväsa saha-vaiëavägraiù / çré-keçaväkhyasya mahänubhävaù
4
tän - them; säntvayitvä - pacified; nija-darçana - the sight of His Person; amtaiù
- by the deathless nectar; sa - He; gaura-candra - the golden moon; bhagavän the all-opulent Lord; jagäma - He went; guro - of His guru; niväsam - the
residence; saha-vaiëava-agraiù - with the advanced vaiñëavas; çré-keçavaäkhyasya - named Çré Keçava; mahä-anubhävaù - munificent.
After pacifying their hearts with the nectarean vision of His Person, the munificent
Lord, Bhagavän Çré Gaura Candra accompanied by the foremost vaiñëavas,
proceeded onwards to the residence of His guru, the great soul, Çré Keçava.

natvä guroù päda-yuga niväsa / tasmin sa cakre karuëämbudhir
hariù
çré-räma-näräyaëa-näma-maìgala / gäyan guëän prema-vibhinnadhairyyaù 5
natvä - after bowing; guroù - of His guru; päda-yugam - pair of feet; niväsam dwelling; tasmin - in that place; sa - He; cakre - made; karuëä-ambudhi - the
ocean of mercy; harih; çré-räma-näräyaëa-näma-maìgalam - auspicious names
Çré Räma and Näräyaëa; gäyan - singing; guëän - the qualities; prema-vibhinnadhairyaù - composure dissolved by love.

[p.366]
Arriving there, the ocean of mercy bowed down to the feet of His guru. Then He
took up His residence in that place, and so doing, He continously sang auspicious
songs of the names and qualities of Çré Räma, Näräyaëa, until His composure
dissolved in prema.

tathäparähne nå-harer aväptyai / nyäsokta-karmmäëi cakära
çuddha
äcäryya-ratno bhagaväç cakära / kåñëasya püjä vidhivad vidhi-jïa 6
tathä - so; aparähne - in the afternoon; nå-hare - of the human-like form of
Hari; aväptyai - for obtaining; nyäsa - renunciation; ukta - spoken; karmäëi functions; cakära - He performed; çuddha - pure; äcärya-ratna - the Jewel
Teacher; bhagavän - the Lord; cakära - did; kåñëasya - of Kåñëa Caitanya; püjäm worship; vidhi-vat - according to etiquette; vidhi-jïa - learned in procedure.
In the afternoon the great personality _cärya Ratna, who was learned in Vedic
vidhi, in a purified state worshipped Çré Kåñëa, and performed the ceremony for the
consecration of sannyäsa .

tataù samépa sa guror hitärthé / gatvävadat karëa-samépa éçaù
svapne mayä mantra-varo hi labdhaù / çëuva tat ki tava sammata
syät 7
tataù - then; samépam - nearby; sa - He; guro - of the guru; hita-arthé - desiring
the welfare; gatvä - went; avadat - He said; karëa-samépe - in the ear; éçaù - the
Lord; svapne - in a dream; mayä - by Me; mantra-vara - excellent mantra; hi truly; labdhaù - obtained; çëuva - hear; tat - that; kim - whether?; tava - your;
sammatam - approved; syät - it may be.
Then desiring His guru's welfare, Çré Viçvambhara approached him and murmured
in his ear, "Within a dream I received an excellent mantra. Please hear it from Me
and tell Me if you approve."

[p.367]
vara-traya tat-çravaëäntika svaya / proväca nyäsokta-manu
viçuddham
çrutvävadat so 'pi harer ida syät / sannyäsa-mantra parama
pavitram 8
vara-trayam - three times; tat-çravaëa-antika - near his ear; svayam - Himself;
proväca - uttered; nyäsa-ukta - recited for renunciation; manum - mantra;
viçuddham - transcendentally pure; çrutvä - hearing; avadat - He said; sa api that very mantra; hare - of Hari; idam - this; syät - this may be; sannyäsamantram - the mantra for accepting sannyäsa; paramam - highest; pavitram pure.
He uttered that transcendentally pure mantra which is chanted by sannyäsés. three
times in his ear. Hearing it, Çré Keçava replied, "Indeed, this is the supremely
purifying mantra of Çré Hari."

vyäjena dékä gurave sa dattvä / lokaika-nätho gurur avyayätmä
guro dadasvädya manéita me / sannyäsam ity äha puöaïjaliù
prabhuù 9
vyäjena - by pretense; dékäm - initiation; gurave - to his guru; sa - He; dattvä gave; loka - of the worlds; eka-nätha - the one Lord; guru - spiritual master;
avyaya-ätmä - whose body is imperishable; guro - O guru; dadasva - please give;
adya - today; manéitam - desired; me - to Me; sannyäsam - renunciation; iti thus; äha - He said; puöa-aïjaliù - hollowed hands; prabhuù - the Master.
Thus by a pretense the one supreme and changeless guru, who is the Master of all
worlds, initiatied His guru. Then with hands folded in supplication, Prabhu said,
"He gurujé! Kindly fulfill My heart's longing and today endow Me with the order of
sannyäsa."

tataù çubhe saìkramane raveù kaëe / kumbha prayäti makarän
manéé

[p.368]
sannyäsa-mantra pradadau mahätmä / çré-keçaväkhyo haraye
vidhäna-vit 10
tataù - then; çubhe - auspicious; saìkramane - in the journey; raveù - of the
sun; kaëe - at the moment; kumbham - Aquarius; prayäti - he enters; makarät from Capricorn; manéé - intelligent; sannyäsa-mantram - mantra for renunciants;
pradadau - bestowed; mahä-ätmä - great soul; çré-keçava-äkhya - known as Çré
Keçava; haraye - to Hari; vidhäna-vit - learned in precept.
Then at the auspicious moment of the sun's journey from Capricorn into Aquarius,
that intelligent mahätmä, Çré Keçava, who was learned in the precepts of spiritual
life, gave back the sannyäsa mantra to Çré Hari.

tatah sa-romaïcita-deha-yañöir / änanda-neträmbubhir ärdra-vakñä
sannyasta eväham iti svaya hari / sa-gadgada-väkyam uväca deva
11
tatah - then; sa-romäïcita - with thrilling of hairs; deha-yañöi - slender body;
änanda-netra-ambubhi - by tears of joy; ärdra-vakñä - wet chest; sannyasta renounced; eva - indeed; aham - I; iti - thus; svayam - spontaneously; hari - the
remover of sin; sa-gadgada-väkyam - with words choked up; uväca - He said;
deva - the Lord.
As the hairs of His slender body thrilled with joy, and His chest became became
wet with tears, Çré Hari Deva candidly uttered with a faltering voice, "At last, I have
given up family life!"

gacchantam älokya hari guruù svaya / daëòa sa-cela tvarayä dadau
kare
bho bho ghäëeti vadan guror vvacaù / çrutvä ghétvä guru-bhaktilampaöaù 12
guror nideça bahu-manyamänas / taträvasat tad-divasa jitäriù

[p.369]
rätrau vasan kértanam äçu cakre / ntya ca tasmin guruëä sama
prabhuù 13
gacchantam - going; älokya - gazing at; harim - Hari; guruù - the spiritual
master; svayam - of His own accord; daëòam - rod; sa-celam - with cloth; tvarayä
- quickly; dadau - gave; kare - in the hand; bho bho - Oh! Oh!; ghäëa - please
take; iti - thus; vadan - saying; guro - of the guru; vacaù - the words; çrutvä hearing; ghétvä- having accepted; guru-bhakti-lampaöaù - very eager for devotion
to His guru; guro - of His guru; nideçam - instruction; bahu-manyamäna - much
honoring; tatra - there; avasat - He dwelt; tat-divasam - that day; jita-ariù victor of the enemies of spiritual life: lust, anger, greed, illusion, envy, madness;
rätrau - at night; vasan - staying; kértanam - chanting; äçu - immediately; cakre He made; ntyam - dancing; ca - and; tasmin - there; guruëä samam - with the
guru; prabhuù - the Master.
Then seeing that Çré Hari was about to depart, His guru overtook Him and quickly
placed the daëa and sannyäsa cloth in His hand, saying, "Bho! Good sir! Please take
these also!" Hearing him, that conqueror of the foes of spiritual life, accepted those
articles of sannyäsa. Then being very eager to teach the principle of guru-bhakti, he
honored the instruction of His guru and resided in that place for the day. Then
suddenly at night our Prabhu began to sing and dance in the company of His guru.

nanartta tasmin jagatä guror guruù / këena särddha mahatä
sukhena
änanda-pürëas tu punaù sa mene / brähma sukha tucchatara
mahätmä 14
nanarta - he danced; tasmin - there; jagatäm - of sentient beings; guro - of the
guru; guruù - the guru; këena - with Kåñëa; särdham - together; mahatä - great;
sukhena - with happiness; änanda-pürëa - filled with joy; tu - indeed; punaù more; sa - he; mene - thought; brähmam sukham - happiness from brahman
realization; tuccha-taram - most insignificant; mahä-ätmä - the great soul.

[p.370]
In great bliss the guru of the guru of all embodied beings danced there with his
disciple, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya. Filled with änanda, which ever increased more and
more, that mahätmä then considered brahma-sukha to be insignificant.

ntyävasäne harim abravét sa / ko 'péha me daëòam imam karägrät
äkya mä präha bhuja-dvayena / spövä svaya tva naöana kuruva 15
ntya-avasäne - at the end of dancing; harim - the dispeller of evil; abravét - he
said; sa - he; ka api - who indeed?; iha - at this time; me - of me; daëòam - staff;
imam - this; kara-agrät - from my fingertips; äkya - taking; mäm - me; präha He said; bhuja-dvayena - with His two arms; spövä - touching; svayam - Himself;
tvam - you; naöanam - dancing; kuruva - do.
When their singing and dancing had ended, Keçava Bharaté said to Çré Hari, "Who
actually accepted the daëa from my fingertips? Who is He that held Me within His
arms and commanded me to dance?

tato 'ham änanda-paripluto mudä / praviçya ntya ktavän suvihvalaù
çrutvä vacas tasya suvismitäs te / sa vaiëaväù prema-vibhinnadhairyäù 16
tata - then; aham - I; änanda-paripluta - immersed in bliss; mudä - out of joy;
praviçya - entering; ntyam - dancing; ktavän - have done; su-vihvalaù - very
overwhelmed; çrutvä - hearing; vaca - the words; tasya - his; su-vismitä - very
astonished; te - they; sa - he; vaiëaväù - devotees of the Lord; prema - out of
love; vibhinna-dhairyäù - composure destroyed.
"Now that I have begun to dance, I am wholly overwhelmed and happily float in an
ocean of bliss." Hearing the words of this former monist, the vaiñëavas became most
astonished, and they also lost all sense of externals within the waves of prema.

çrutvä guror väkyam analpam arthavan / nanartta tasmin svajanair anuvrata

[p.371]
harñeëa yukto mahatä mahätmä / svaya hari svätma-rato guëäçraya
17
çrutvä - hearing; guro - of His guru; väkyam - the statement; analpam - not
inconsequential; arthavat - meaningful; nanarta - He danced; tasmin - there; svajanai - with His men; anuvrata - devoted follower; harñeëa - with joy; yukta imbued; mahatä - with great; mahä-ätmä - great soul; svayam - Himself; hari the remover of sin; sva-ätma-rata - in love with Himself; guëa-äçraya - the
shelter of good qualities.
Hearing these words from His guru, which were not trivial but filled with meaning,
Çré Hari, feeling Himself his guru's devoted follower, in a mood of immense
exultation, sang and danced with His men in that place. Thereafter Lord who offers
shelter to all sublime qualities became attached to contemplation of His inner Self.
sa bhäraté prema-pariplutätmä / kamaëòalu daëòam apéha düre

kiptvä nanartta prabhuëä sama vai / sannyäsa-dharmasya pavitrahetunä 18
sa - he; bhäraté - Keçava Bhäraté; prema-paripluta-ätmä - a soul floating in
prema; kamaëòalum - waterpot; daëòam - staff; api - also; iha - in that place;
düre - to a disant place; kiptvä - throwing away; nanarta - he danced; prabhuëä with Prabhu; samam - together; vai - verily; sannyäsa-dharmasya - of the
renounced order; pavitra-hetunä - with the purpose of purifying.
That Keçava Bhäraté had become a soul fully immersed in love of Kåñëa. Tossing
far away his daëa and kamaëòalu , he danced with Mahäprabhu to purify his
sannyäsa-dharma.

iti svaya yad bhagavat-kta çubha / sannyäsam änanda-kara dvijanmamäm
çëoti yas tasya bhaved vimuktir / labhec ca tat tan manasä yad
icchati 19

[p.372]
iti - thus; svayam - by His own desire; yat - what; bhagavat-ktam - done by the
Lord; çubham - sublime; sannyäsa - renunciation; änanda-karam - evoking bliss;
dvi-janmamäm - for twice-born men; çëoti - he hears; ya - who; tasya - his;
bhavet - it may be; vimukti - complete liberation; labhet - can achieve; ca - and;
tat tat - whatever; manasä - by his mind; yat - what; icchati - he desires.
One who hears this sublime narration of the Lord's acceptance of sannyäsa, which
awakens bliss in the hearts of the twice born, achieves complete freedom from the
bondage of material existence and attains whatever his heart may desire.

Thus ends the Second Sarga entitled "Çré Gauräìga Purifies the Sannyäsa
_çrama," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Third Sarga
räòha-deça-bhramaëam
Wandering in Räha-deça

atha natvä guroù päda / tam anujïäpya mädhavaù
tadäjïayävrajad deça / räòha güòho mahä-bhujaù 1
atha - then; natvä - bowing; guroù - of guru; pädam - feet; tam - him; anujïäpya
- taking permission; mädhavaù - the husband of Lakñmé; tadä - then; äjïayä - by
his order; avrajat - He went; deçam - land; räòham - the land in Bengal on the
western bank of the Gaìgä; güòha - secretly, confidential; mahä-bhujaù - mightyarmed.
Then and bowing to the feet of His guru , the mighty-armed Mädhava then
requested permission to depart. Following his order, He left secretly for Räha-deça,

[p.373]
absorbed in confidential thoughts.

nityävadhütena saha / këa-gäthä muhur muhuù
pathi gacchan lapan ntyan / gäyan sva-bhakti-bhävitaù 2
nitya - eternal; avadhütena - by He who is free from convention; saha together with; këa-gäthäm - songs of Kåñëa; muhu muhuù - repeatedly; pathi - on
the path; gacchan - going; lapan - conversing; ntyan - dancing; gäyan - singing;
sva-bhakti-bhävitaù - with moods of His own devotion.
While travelling on the path in the company of the avadhüta, Çré Caitanya again
and again untiringly discussed the ever-fresh qualies of Çré Kåñëa and danced and
sang bhakti-inspiring songs for His internal identity of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa.

dhyäyan këa-padämbhojam / ätmanätmätma-vigraham
vrajan premäçru-dhäräbhir / nirjharair giri-çìgavat 3
dhyäyan - contemplating; këa-pada-ambhojam - the lotus feet of Kåñëa; ätmanä
- by His heart; ätma-ätma - the soul of all souls, Paramätma; vigraham - form;
vrajan - going; prema-açru - tears of love; dhäräbhi - with currents; nirjharai - by
waterfalls; giri-çìga-vat - like the peak of a mountain.
While wandering, He would meditate on the lotus feet of the Soul of all souls.
Then becoming covered by torrents of love-tears, He appeared like a mountain peak
surrounded by cascading waterfalls.

viluptäkaù kvacit kampa-pulakäïcita-vigrahaù
vihvalaù skhalitaù kväpi / kvacid druta-gatir vrajan 4
vilupta-akaù - eyes blinded by tears; kvacit - sometimes; kampa - trembling;
pulaka-aïcita - hairs bristling with ecstacy; vigrahaù - form; vihvalaù entranced; skhalitaù - stumbling; kva api - sometimes; kvacit - sometimes; drutagati - swift gait; vrajan - going.

[p.374]
Sometimes His eyes became blinded by tears, His body trembled, and His hairs
bristled out of ecstacy. Entranced in consciouness of Kåñëa, He would sometimes
stumble and sometimes run swiftly.

matta-karéndravat kväpi / tejasä vavdhe kvacit
kvacid gäyati govinda / këa këeti sädaram 5
matta - intoxicated; kari-indra-vat - like a lord of elephants; kva api sometimes; tejasä - with His power; vavdhe - He increased; kvacit - sometimes;
kvacit - sometimes; gäyati - He sings; govinda - O Govinda!; këa këa - O Kåñëa,
O Kåñëa!; iti - thus; sa-ädaram - with reverence.
Sometimes He would expand in power like an intoxicated war elephant, and
sometimes with great reverence, He would utter, "Govinda! Kåñëa! Kåñëa!"

tatra deçe harer nämäçrutvä cätéva vihvalaù
praviçyäha jale kipra / tyajämi deham ätmanaù 6
tatra - there; deçe - in the country; hare - of Hari; nämä - the name; açrutvä not hearing; ca - and; atéva - intensely; vihvalaù - overwhelmed; praviçya entering; aham - I; jale - in the water; kipram - swiftly; tyajämi - I am giving up;
deham - My body; ätmanaù - own.
Since Çré Gauräìga was unable to hear the names of Çré Hari chanted in that land,
felt great distress and declared, "I shall at once enter this water and give up this
body.

na çëomi harer näma / katha brähmaëa-sasthitau
iti niçcitya toyasya / samépa sa vrajan prabhuù 7
na - not; çëomi - I hear; hare - of Hari; näma - the name; katham - how?;
brähmaëa-sasthitau - in which there are brähmaëas; iti - thus; niçcitya -

[p.375]
determining; toyasya - of water; samépam - near; sa - He; vrajan - going; prabhuù the Master.
"In this land, which is populated by so many brähmaëas, why do I not hear
chanting of the names of Çré Hari?" Thus, with fixed determination our Prabhu
approached the water's edge .

dadarça balakän tatra / gavä saìgha-vihäriëaù
nityänandävadhütena / çikitän hari-kérttanam 8
dadarça - He saw; bälakän - boys; tatra - there; gaväm - cows; saìgha-vihäriëaù
- enjoying one another's company; nityänanda-avadhütena - by Nityänanda
Avadhüta; çikitän - taught; hari-kértanam - chanting the names of Hari.
Nityänanda Avadhüta saw several boys who were tending their cows and sporting
amongst one another and he instructed them on the chanting of the names of Çré
Hari.

tatraiko bälako 'tyuccair / hari vada hari vada
iti proväca hareëa / punaù punar udära-dhéù 9
tatra - there; eka - one; bälaka - boy; ati-uccai - in a very loud voice; harim
vada - chant the names of Hari; harim vada - Hari Bol; iti - thus; proväca - he
proclaimed; hareëa - with exhilaration; punaù puna - repeatedly; udära-dhéù broad-minded.
Amongst them was a boy of prodigious intelligence, who with great exhilaration
proclaimed loudly again and again, "Hari Bol! Hari Bol!"

tat çrutvä harçéto devaù / sarakan deham ätmanaù
tatraiva prarurodärtto / vihvalaç cäpatad bhuvi 10
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; harçéta - joyous; devaù - the Divinity; sarakan -

[p.376]
saved; deham - body; ätmanaù - His own; tatra - there; eva - indeed; praruroda He wept loudly; ärta - afflicted; vihvala - entranced; ca - and; apatat - He fell;
bhuvi - on the earth.
Hearing this, the Lord felt happy and thus decided to desist from from destroying
His body. Then He wept loudly out of feeling anguish of separation from Kåñëa and
fell entranced to the earth.

säntvitaç cävadhütena / vndäraëyasya värttayä
kim adbhuta tato gatvä / çikä cakre mahä-matiù 11
säntvita - pacified; ca - but; avadhütena - by the avadhüta; vndä-araëyasya - of
Våndävana; värtayä - with news; kim - how?; adbhutam - wonderful; tata - then;
gatvä - going; çikäm cakre - He gave instruction; mahä-matiù - one having
munificent desires.
Then Gaura Hari was pacified by the avadhüta, who spoke to Him news of
Våndäraëya. Oh! what marvellous news that was. And while proceeding on the path,
filled with the great and munificent desires of pure devotion, He gave me some
instructions:

navadvépa pragaccha tva / mä präha çré-niketanaù
tato 'ha çoka-duùkhärtto / navadvépa vrajann api 12
navadvépam - to Navadvépa; pragaccha - go swiftly; tvam - you; mäm - to me;
präha - He said; çré-niketanaù - the shelter of the goddess of fortune; tata - then;
aham - I; çoka-duùkha - lamentation and grief; ärta - afflicted; navadvépam - to
Navadvépa; vrajan - going; api - as if.
"At once yo must depart for Navadvépa," the Lord of Lakñmé said. Then, afflicted
by grief and lamentation, I readied myself to leave.

namo näräyaëäyeti / mad-väkya bhakta-sannidhau
vaktavya bhavatä yena / mamänando bhaviyati 13

[p.377]
nama - obeisances; näräyaëäya - to the shelter of all living beings; iti - thus;
mat-väkyam - My words; bhakta-sannidhau - in the presence of the devotees;
vaktavyam - should be spoken; bhavatä - by Your grace; yena - whereby; mama My; änanda - joy; bhaviyati - there will be.
The Lord further said, "Your grace must deliver this message from Me to all My
devotees, `namo näräyaëäya, Let us offer our obeisances uno Näräyaëa.' This will
bring Me joy."

çrutvä sarvva harer väkya / gauräìge nyasta-jévanaù
sthito 'ha paramärtto 'pi / gaura-candra-viceöitam 14
çrutvä - hearing; sarvam - all; hare - of Hari; väkyam - words; gauräìge - unto
Gauräìga; nyasta-jévanaù - given up my life; sthita - remained; aham - I; paramaärta - extremely disturbed; api - although; gauracandra-viceöitam- - the activities
of Gaura Candra.
I heard this command of Gauräìga Hari, but because I had completely given up my
life for His sake and thus felt without any shelter other than Him, I simply remained
there in His presence, feeling much perturbed.

jïäta bähyopasaìkränta / nibhta paramädbhutam
sa-gadgada sa ca präha / çré-këa-näma-maìgalam 15
jïätam - knowing; bähya - external; upasaìkräntam - reflection; nibhtam confidential; parama-adbhutam - very wonderful; sa-gadgadam - with faltering
voice; sa - He; ca - and; präha - said; çré-këa-näma-maìgalam - the auspicious
name of Çré Kåñëa.
I understood the very astonishing activities of Çré Gaura Candra to be confidential,
in that His external state was merely a reflection of His inner trance. Then with a
faltering voice the Lord uttered the auspicious name of Kåñëa.

[p.378]
hasati skhalati kväpi / kampati gäyati kvacit
roditi vrajati kväpi / patati svapiti kitau 16
hasati - He laughs; skhalati - He stumbles; kväpi - sometimes; kampati - He
trembles; gäyati - He sings; kvacit - sometimes; roditi - He cries; vrajati - He
wanders about; kväpi - sometimes; patati - He falls; svapiti - He sleeps; kitau - on
the earth.
At times He would laugh, at times His voice became choked, and sometimes He
would tremble or sing. At times He would weep or wander here and there, and at
times He would fall down and sleep upon the earth.

gopé-bhävair däsa-bhävair / éça-bhävai kvacit kvacit
ätma-tantraù svätma-rataù / çikayan sva-janän ayam 17
gopé-bhävai - with moods of a gopé; däsa-bhävai - moods of a servant; éçabhävai - moods of the Lord; kvacit kvacit - sometimes; ätma-tantraù - selfsufficient; sva-ätma-rataù - self-satisfied; çikayan - teaching; sva-janän - His own
men; ayam - this.
At times He would taste the moods of a gopé, at other times the moods of a servant
of the Lord, and sometimes the moods of the Supreme Lord Himself. Through these
moods, the self-sufficient and self-satisfied Lord taught His people lessons.

ttéya-divasa yävan / na sasmära sva-vigraham
mahä-bhéto vyäkulo 'ha / ki karométi cintitaù 18
ttéya-divasam - third day; yävat - until; na - not; sasmära - He remembered; svavigraham - His body; mahä-bhéta - very anxious; vyäkula - disturbed; aham - I;
kim - what?; karomi - I am doing; iti - thus; cintitaù - anxious.
Until the third day, Gaura Hari continuously lost remembrance of His body. At
that, I became very anxious and disturbed, and I worried, "What should I do now?"

[p.379]
tatah para-dine deha / sasmära madhusüdana
tato 'ham ägato geham / äjïayä nyäsinä guroù 19
tata - then; para-dine - on the next day; deham - body; sasmära - He became
conscious; madhusüdana - the killer of Madhu; tata - then; aham - I; ägata came; geham - home; äjïayä - by the order; nyäsinäm - of renunciants; guroù - of
the guru.
On the following day, Çré Gaura regained consciousness of His external body. Then
I took permission from that guru of all renunciants and returned to my home.

äcäryya-gehe çré-këaù / para-çvo vä gamiyati
tatraiva bhavatä bhävi / darçana tasya niçcitam 20
äcärya-gehe - in the home of the _cärya; çré-këaù - Caitanya Prabhu; para-çva on the day after tomorrow; vä - or; gamiyati - He will come; tatra - there; eva certainly; bhavatäm - of your honors; bhävi - there will be; darçanam - vision;
tasya - of Him; niçcitam - assuredly.
There I gave the message to the devotees, "On the day after tomorrow, Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya will come to the house of the _cärya. At that time, your good selves shall
have His darçana. This is certain."

iti çruta çré-hari-kértanädika / mayä ca dövä bhagavat-kta çubham
samagram etat kathita sumaìgala / harer guëa sarvva-sukha-prada
nëäm 21
iti - thus; çrutam - heard; çré-hari-kértana-ädikam - the singing and other
activities of Çré Hari; mayä - by me; ca - and; dövä - seen; bhagavat-ktam - done
by the Lord; çubham - sublime; samagram - completely; etat - this; kathitam described; su-maìgalam - very auspicious; hare - of Hari; guëam - qualities;
sarva-sukha-pradam - bestowing all happiness; nëäm - for humanity.

[p.380]
Thus did I see and hear sublime chanting and other pastimes performed by Çré
Hari, the all-opulent Personality of Godhead. I have described in full these most
auspicious qualities of Hari, which can award all happiness to mankind.

Thus ends the Third Sarga entitled "Wandering in Räha-deça," in the Third
Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fourth Sarga
çré-advaita-bäöé-vihäraù
Pleasure Pastimes at the House of Çré Advaita

äcäryya-ratnäd dhi niçamya tad-vaco / harer guëäsväda-vibhinnadhairyäù
ärta-svarair vä ruruduù suduùkhitä / advaita-mukhyä dvija-sajjanäs
tataù 1
äcärya-ratnät - from the Jewel Teacher; hi - indeed; niçamya - hearing; tat-vaca
- his words; hare - of Hari; guëa-äsväda - relishing the qualities; vibhinnadhairyäù - calmness smashed to pieces; ärta-svarai - with anguished sounds; vä or; ruruduù - they wept; su-duùkhitä - very unhappy; advaita-mukhyä - headed
by Advaita; dvija-sajjanä - saintly brähmaëas; tataù - then.
When Çré Advaita, together with the other saintly brähmaëas, whose composure
was shattered by relishing the sublime qualities of Hari, heard from _cärya Ratna
the news of Gaura's renunciation of the world, they wept most pitiably with cries of
anguish.

[p.381]
atha çré jagadéço hi / bhaktänäm ärti-näçakaù
advaitäcäryya-nilaye / gacchäméti mano dadhe 2
atha - then; çré-jagat-éça - Lord of all sentient beings; hi - surely; bhaktänäm of the devotees; ärti-näçakaù - destroyer of the sorrows; advaita-äcärya-nilaye in the abode of Advaita _cärya; gacchämi - I am going; iti - thus; mana - mind;
dadhe - set.
Thus the Lord of all embodied beings, who vanquishes the woes of His bhaktas,
resolved to set forth for the abode of Advaita _cärya.

parivrajya räòha-deça / lokaika-nayanotsava
avadhüta mahätmäna / proväca madhura vaca 3
parivrajya - wandering; räòha-deçam - the land of Räha; loka - people; eka only; nayana-utsava - festival for the eyes; avadhütam - beyond social
conventions; mahä-ätmänam - the great soul; proväca - spoke; madhuram pleasing; vaca - words.
As the Lord whose form was a festival for eyes of the people, wandered about Rähadeça, spoke sweetly to the munificent avadhüta as follows:

gaccha tva jähnavé-tére / navadvépa manoramam
mätara parayä bhaktyä / mama näma puraùsaram 4
saçäntyä sukhé-kåtvä / çré-kåñëa-caritädinä
tatratyän vaiñëavän sarvvän / çréväsädén mama priyän 5
samänayäcäryya-geha / yävat tatra vrajämy aham
çrutväjïä jagadéçasya / jagäma tvarayä mudä 6
navadvépa çriyä yukta / çréväsasyäçrama çubham
vijïäpya keçaväjïä sa / çréväsädibhir anvitaù 7

[p.382]
gaccha - please go; tvam - You; jähnavé-tére - by the bank of Gaìgä; navadvépam - to Navadvépa; mana-ramam - mind-enchanting; mätaram - mother;
parayä - with elevated; bhaktyä - with devotion; mama - My; näma - name; puraùsaram - preceded by; saçäntyä - pacifying; sukhé-ktvä - making happy; çré-këacarita-ädinä - by descriptions of Çré Kåñëa's character and so on; tatratyän residents; vaiëavän - devotees of Viñëu; sarvän - all; çréväsa-ädén - headed by
Çréväsa; mama - to Me; priyän - dear; samänaya - bring together; äcärya-geham to the house of the _cärya; yävat - until; tatra - there; vrajämi - I go; aham - I;
çrutvä - hearing; äjïäm - the order; jagat-éçasya - of the Lord of the universe;
jagäma - He went; tvarayä - swiftly; mudä - with joy; navadvépam - the town of
Nine Islands; çriyä - with opulence; yuktam - embellished; çréväsasya - of
Çréväsa; äçramam - spiritual shelter; çubham - the resplendent; vijïäpya informing; keçava-äjïäm - the order of Keçava; sa - he; çréväsa-ädibhi - Çréväsa
and the others; anvitaù - in the company.
"Kindly go by way of the Gaìgä's bank to the enchanting town of Navadvépa. First
utter My name with great devotion to My mother, and kindly speak to her about Çré
Këa's character, qualities and so forth so that she may feel peace and happiness.
Then summon all My beloved vaiñëavas, headed by Çréväsa, to wait until I come at
the house of the _cärya in Çäntipüra." After hearing these orders from Gaura
Jagadéçvara, Çré Nityänanda at once swiftly departed in jubilant spirits for
Navadvépa, which was blessed by the opulences of goddess Lakñmé. When
Nityänanda entered auspicious äçrama of Çréväsa's häkura, and reported the
instruction of Gaura Keçava to Çréväsa and the other bhaktas.

çré-çacé caraëa-dvandva / namas-ktya ktäïjaliù
säntvayitvä ca tä bhaktyä / nityänando dayä-nidhiù 8
çré-çacé-caraëa-dvandvam - the two feet of mother Çacé; nama-ktya - offering
homage; kta-aïjaliù - folded hands; säntvayitvä - pacified; ca - and; täm - her;
bhaktyä - with devotion; nitya-änanda - ever blissful; dayä-nidhiù - the ocean of
mercy.
Then Çré Nityänanda, the ocean of mercy, bowed with folded hands to the lotus

[p.383]
feet of Çré Çacé Devé, and through His devotion, gave peace to her mind.

tayä päcitam anna ca / bhuktvä sthitvä pare dine
sarvvais tair brähmaëai çüdrair / vaidyair api mahä-manäù 9
jagämädvaita-nilaya / saharas tvarayänvitaù
çacé ca parayä prétyä / putra çré-puruottamam 10
matvä jagäma tatraiva / gehe 'dvaitasya sa-tvarä
sarvve te tad-dinam sthitvä / bhuktvänna pävana mahat 11
çré-yuktädvaita-varyyasya / çiväçasya mahätmanaù
tataù paradine pupa-grämäd ägacchati prabhau 12
sarvve te muditä jagmus / tan-maìgala-mahotsaväù
açru-kampa-pulakädyai / pürëäù parama-vihvaläù 13
tayä - by her; päcitam - cooked; annam - foodstuffs; ca - and; bhuktvä - eating;
sthitvä - stayed; pare dine - on the next day; sarvai - by all; tai - by them;
brähmaëai - by the spiritually aware; çüdrai - by the workers; vaidyai - by the
physicians; api -even; mahä-manäù - the broad-minded soul; jagäma - He went;
advaita-nilayam - the abode of Advaita; sa-hara - with joy; tvarayä anvitaù - with
speed; çacé - Çacé Devé; ca - and; parayä - with elevated; prétyä - love; putram son; çré-purua-uttamam - the ultimate Person; matvä - thinking; jagäma - she
went; tatra - there; eva - surely; gehe - to the home; advaitasya - of Advaita; satvarä - with speed; sarve - all; te - they; tat-dinam - that day; sthitvä - staying;
bhuktvä - eaten; annam - foods; pävanam - purifying; mahat - great; çré-yukta blessed by the goddess of fortune; advaita-varyasya - of the great Advaita; çivaaçasya - of the plenary portion of Çiva; mahä-ätmanaù - of the magnanimous;
tataù - then; para-dine - on the next day; pupa-grämät - from the town of Puñpagräma (Phuliyä-gräma); ägacchati - at the arrival; prabhau - the Master; sarve all; te - they; muditä - engladdened; jagmu - went; tat - the Lord; maìgalamahotsaväù - auspiciously festive; açru-kampa-pulaka - tears, trembling and
erect hairs; ädyai - and so on; pürëäù - filled; parama-vihvaläù - supremely

[p.384]
entranced.
Nityänanda ate the foods she had cooked and then took rest sufficiently. On the
following day, accompanied by all the bhaktas, including brähmaëas, çüdras and
even lowly physicians like myself, that mahätmä departed for Çäntipüra and the
home of Advaita. Çacé also in gladness and consummate love went with great haste
to Advaita's house thinking all the while of her son, the Ultimate Supreme Person.
Throughout that day all of the bhaktas stayed there and ate the highly sanctified
prasädé food given by the blessed Mahätmä Çré Advaita, the plenary portion of Çré
Çiva. On the next day, Mahäprabhu came from Puñpa-gräma, and all of the bhaktas
rejoiced in a grand festival of saìkértana, considering that Gauräìga's auspicious
presence was the actual festival. Becoming wholly immersed in transcendental
trance, they wept, they trembled, and their forms became covered by pulakas.

tapta-kaïcana-vapur dhta-daëòo / rakta-vastra-pariveöita-dehaù
meru-çìga iva gairika-yuktas / tejasä harir iva pracakäse 14
tapta-kaïcana-vapu - body of molten golden hue; dhta-daëòa - held the staff;
rakta-vastra - by saffron cloth; pariveöita-dehaù - body covered; meru-çìga - the
peak of Meru; iva - like; gairika-yukta - with reddish gold; tejasä - by potency;
hari; iva - like; pracakäçe - radiated.
The Navadvépa-bäsés saw that Gaura Hari's golden body was dressed in saffron
cloth, and He held the staff of a sannyäsi. He glowed with great reddish-gold
potency like Mount Meru.

ta vilokya n-hari hari-däsäù / präëam ätmana iväçu praëemuù
daëòavad bhüvi nipatya mahäntaù / känta-vaktra-kamala mumuduç
ca 15
tam - Him; vilokya - gazing at; n-harim - Hari in His human-like form; haridäsäù - the servants of Hari; präëam - life force; ätmana - of the soul; iva - like;
äçu - immediately; praëemuù - offered obeisances; daëòa-vat - like a rod; bhüvi on the earth; nipatya - falling; mahäntaù - the great souls; känta-vaktra - lovely

[p.385]
face; kamalam - lotus; mumudu - rejoiced; ca - and.
His servants fell flat like rods to the ground, and offered obeisances to Nåhari.
They appeared like the senses of the body offering homage to the life-force. Then
those great souls took delight as they contemplated the lotus flower of His lovely
countenance.

netra-väri-jhara-pürita-dehä / hara-gadgada-raväù pulakäìgäù
tän vilokya bhagavän kpämbudhir / döi-vöibhir alaìkta-dehän 16
netra-väri - tear-drops; jhara - waterfalls; pürita - covered; dehä - bodies; hara joy; gadgada-raväù - choked sounds; pulaka-aìgäù - bodies bristling with hairs;
tän - them; vilokya - glancing; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; kpä-ambudhi ocean of mercy; döi-vöibhi - by the rain of His glances; alaìkta-dehän - bodies
ornamented.
Tears cascaded from their eyes, covering their bodies, which became covered by
pulakas, and their throats became choked-up out of jubilation. The all-opulent Lord,
the ocean of mercy, glanced over them, and by the shower of those glances their
bodies became adorned.

sparçanena muditän hasitena / bhäñitena ddha-hasta-graheëa
pürëa-käma-vibhavän smita-känta- / divya-padma-vadanaù sa hi
cakre 17
sparçanena - by the touch; muditän - gladdened; hasitena - by the smiles;
bhäñitena - by His speech; ddha-hasta-graheëa - by the firm grip of His hands;
pürëa-käma - fulfilled desires; vibhavän - felt; smita-känta - lovely smile; divyapadma - divine lotus; vadanaù - face; sa - He; hi - indeed; cakre - made.
By His touch, by His smiles, by His speech, by the firm grip of His hands, Çré
Gauräìga, whose face with its smiles of love resembled a divine lotus, made the
devotees very happy, and they felt that all their desires were fulfilled.

[p.386]
te 'pi höa-manasaù pulakena / püritäìga-vibhaväù sukham éyuù
taiù sureça iva deva-samühair / ägataù sa bhagavän sahasaiva 18
te - they; api - also; höa-manasaù - engladdened hearts; pulakena - with
erections follicles hairs; pürita-aìga - filled limbs; vibhaväù - spread; sukham happiness; éyuù - they obtained; taiù - by them; sura-éça - Viñëu; iva - like;
samühai - with his multitudes; ägataù - became; sa - He; bhagavän - the allopulent Lord; sahasa - suddenly; eva - indeed.
Their hearts were engladdened and their hairs and every limb of their bodies
became covered by pulakas. Suddenly Gaura Bhagavän with the bhaktas appeared to
be Çré Viñëu, the Lord of all godly beings accompanied by the demigods.

advitéya-gurur varyya-niketa / rocayan sa nitarä päda-padmaiù
äsane samupaviçya suklipte / räjamäna iva tigma-dédhitiù 19
advitéya-guru - the incomparable guru, varya-niketam - the excellent
residence; rocayan - enhancing; sa - He; nitaräm - extremely; päda-padmaiù - by
His lotus feet; äsane - on the seat; samupaviçya - sitting; suklipte - nicely
designed; räjamäna - shining; iva - like; tigma-dédhitiù - fiercely brilliant (the
sun).
With the touch His lotus feet the peerless guru beautified the excellent residence
of Advaita. Seated on a fine seat Gaura shone with fierce rays like the sun.

saïjagau hari-kathä sa-gadgada / netra-väribhir alaìkta-dehaù
badarikäçrama iva i-madhye / rajati sma sa näräyaëa-devaù 20
saïjagau - He sang; hari-kathäm - the stories of Hari; sa-gadgadam - with
faltering voice; netra-väribhi - by tears; alaìkta-dehaù - ornamented body;
badarika-äçrame - in the spiritual resort amidst the badari (jujube) bushes; iva like; i-madhye - in the midst of the sages; rajati - He shone; sma - indeed; sa He; näräyaëa-devaù - Lord Näräyaëa.

[p.387]
With faltering voice He sang pastime-songs of Çré Hari, and as His body glistened
with the ornaments of His tears, He appeared like the sage Näräyaëa-deva amidst
the åñis at Badarikäçrama.

çré-çacé praëipatyäha / sädara karuëä-mayaù
tiöhämi satata mätas / tava sannihito hy aham 21
çré-çacém - to Çré Çacé; praëipatya - falling down; äha - He said; sa-ädaram with respect; karuëä-mayaù - merciful; tiöhämi - I stay; satatam - always; mäta O mother; tava - your; sannihita - near; hi - indeed; aham - I.
When Çré Çacé-mätä arrived with great respect the merciful Lord fell at her feet,
then He said, "He Mä!, certainly I always reside at your side."

advaitäcäryya-varyyeëa / dattam anna catur-vidham
bubhuje yajïa-bhuë nätho / bhaktair bhakta-janeöa-daù 22
advaita-äcärya-varyeëa - by the great Advaita; dattam - given; annam - food;
catu-vidham - of four kinds; bubhuje - He enjoyed; yajïa-bhuk - the enjoyer of
sacrifice; nätha - Lord; bhaktai - with the devotees; bhakta-jana - to the devotees;
iöa-daù - giving the desired.
Then the Lord, who is the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice, who takes pleasure in
satisfing His devotees' dearly cherished desires, enjoyed amongst them the four
kinds of foods presented by the great Advaitäcärya.

tatra supto rajanyä sa / çee yäme samutthitaù
gäyan kala-pada këa / nanartta sva-janai saha 23
tatra - then; supta - slept; rajanyäm - at night; sa - He; çee yäme - at the end of
night; samutthitaù - arisen; gäyan - singing; kala-padam - melodious verses;
këam - of Kåñëa; nanarta - He danced; sva-janai - with His own men; saha - in

[p.388]
company.
After resting the night there, He rose towards its end, and dancing with His people,
He sang verses about Kåñëa in sweet melodies.

atha prabhäte vimale / çréväsädén dvijottamän
väcä madhurayoväca / gacchätha sväçramän prati 24
atha - then; prabhäte - in the dawn; vimale - spotless; çréväsa-ädén - headed by
Çréväsa; dvija-uttamän - the transcendental twice-born men; väcä - with words;
madhurayä - with charming; uväca - spoke; gaccha - please go; atha - now; svaäçramän - your own hermitages; prati - towards.
Then in the pure light of dawn, in a gentle mellow tone, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya
instructed Çréväsa and the other exalted brähmaëas , "Go now to your respective
äçramas.

yäsyämi deva-deveça-puruottama-darçane
särvvabhauma-dvijendreëa / särddha paçyämi ta harim 25
yäsyämi - I shall go; deva-deva-éça - the Lord of Viñëu; puruottama-darçane for a sight of the ultimate Person; särvabhauma - named Särvabhauma; dvijaindreëa - with the best of brahmaëas; särdham - together; paçyämi - I (shall) see;
ta - Him; harim - Hari.
"Now I shall depart to take darçana of Çré Puruñottama Jagannätha, who is the
original Lord of all the devatäs and even Lord Viñëu. There I shall behold the face
of Çré HariIn the company of Särvabhauma, the chief of the twice-born men.

yumäbhir atra kartavya / sadaiva hari-kérttanam
vimatsarair viçeena / jägare hari-väsare 26
yumäbhi - by yourselves; atra - now; kartavyam - should be done; sadä -

[p.389]
always; eva - surely; hari-kértanam - the chanting of Hari's names; vimatsarai free from envy; viçeena - especially; jägare - awake; hari-väsare - on the day of
Hari (Ekädaçé).
"Now with your hearts free from envy incessantly perform Hari-kértana. Also
attentively observe Ekädaçé and stay awake throughout the night absorbed hearing
Çré Näma and discussing Hari-kathä."

eva visjya tän sarvvän / advaitäcäryyam agrataù
samäliìgya ca bähubhyä / yayau premäçru-locanaù 27
evam - then; visjya - sending forth; tän - them; sarvän - all; advaita-äcäryam the incarnation of a devotee; agrataù - in the presence of; samäliìgya - fully
embracing; ca - and; bähubhyäm - with His two arms; yayau - He went; premaaçru-locanaù - eyes filled with tears of love.
In the presence of Advaitäcärya, Gaura Hari warmly embraced all of them with His
beautiful arms and sent them forth. Then, His eyes brimming with tears of
prema,the Lord also departed. .

tatas tëam sva-daçanair / dhtvä çré-hari-däsakaù
papäta daëòavat bhümau / päda-müle jagat-pateù 28
tata - then; tëam - grass; sva-daçanai - with his teeth; dhtvä - holding; çré-haridäsakaù - häkura Haridäsa; papäta - he fell; daëòa-vat - like a rod; bhümau - on
the earth; päda-müle - at the soles of His feet; jagat-pateù - of the Master of the
universe.
But Haridäsa, holding grass between his teeth, then fell flat like a rod on the earth
at the very soles of the Lord's feet.

tad dövä vyathito näthas / tam uväcäçru-locanaù
eva rüpeëäham eva / jagannätha-padämbuje 29

[p.390]
nipatya savadiyämi / yathä tvayi kpä hareù
bhaven niçcitam ity uktvä / samäliìgya ca ta punaù 30
visasarja ca ta prétyä / tam uväca dvijarabhaù
çré-yutädvaita-varyyas tu / bhagavanta jagad-gurum 31
tat - that; dövä - seeing; vyathita - disturbed; nätha - Lord; tam - to him; uväca said; açru-locanaù - with tears in His eyes; evam rüpeëa - in this manner; aham I; eva - truly; jagat-nätha - of the Lord of the cosmos; pada-ambuje - at the lotus
feet; nipatya - having fallen; savadiyämi - I shall speak; yathä - so that; tvayi upon you; kpä - the mercy; hareù - of Hari; bhavet - it may be; niçcitam certainly; iti - thus; uktvä - speaking; samäliìgya - warmly embracing; ca - and;
tam - him; punaù - repeatedly; visasarja - He sent forth; ca - and; tam - him;
prétyä - with love; tam - Him; uväca - he said; dvija-åabhaù - the best of
brähmaëas; çré-yuta-advaita-varya - the great Advaita; tu - indeed; bhagavantam the Supreme Lord; jagat-gurum - spiritual master of all sentient beings.
Seeing this, Gauräìga's heart was agitated, and with tears in His eyes said, "Just as
you have fallen at My feet, so I shall fall at the lotus feet of Jagannätha Svämé. Then I
will speak to Him in such a way that surely You shall receive His mercy." So saying,
Çacé-nandana warmly embraced Haridäsa again and again and released him with
love. Then the best of the twice-born, the great Advaitäcärya, addressed the
Supreme Lord, who had accepted the role of the spiritual master of all sentient
beings:

bhagavad-gamana çrutvä / tava me na katha bhavet
premä nätha taveya ki / kpä ta präha keçavaù 32
bhagavat-gamanam - the departure of the Lord; çrutvä - having heard; tava Your; me - to Me; na - not; katha - how?; bhavet - it may be; premä - love; nätha O Lord; tava - Your; iyam - this; kim - whether?; kpä - mercy; tam - Him; präha He said; keçavaù - the Lord who has beautiful hair.

[p.391]
"He Nätha! I have heard that Your Lordship is now leaving. How can it be that love
for You has not awakened in Me? O Lord, please show Your mercy upon Me!" Gaura
Keçava replied:

eva syäc cet tava premä / katha me gamana bhavet
ity uktvä ta samäliìgya / ddha-snigdhair anuvrataiù 33
gadädharäòibhir viprair / gacchanta ta dvijottamaù
gopénäthäcäryya-mukhyaù / proväca préëayan harim 34
evam - thus; syät - it may be; cet - if; tava - Your; premä - love; katham - how?;
me - for Me; gamanam - going; bhavet - it may be; iti - thus; uktvä - speaking;
tam - Him; samäliìgya - fully embracing; ddha-snigdhai - with those of firm
affection; anuvrataiù - with those of ardent attachment; gadädhara-äòibhi headed by Gadädhara; viprai - by the learned brähmaëas; gacchantam departing; tam - Him; dvija-uttamaù - the transcendental brähmaëa; gopénäthaäcärya-mukhyaù - the eminent Gopénätha _cärya; proväca - declared; préëayan lovingly; harim - the remover of evil.
"You have such love for Me; how can I possible leave?" So saying, He warmly
embraced Advaita. As the Lord was departing in company with Çré Gadädhara and
the other vipras, who were His devout followers endowed with firm affection for
Him, the exalted brähmaëa named Gopénätha _cärya addressed Çré Hari lovingly:

bhagavas tvad-vapur aha / draöum icchämi käma-da
tat çrutvä vacana tasya / vasana samapäkarot 35
anävta käya-daëòa / tapta-cämékara-prabham
ghanäpäye yathä meru-çìga candra-karäïcitam 36
bhagavan - O Lord; tvat-vapu - Your body; aham - I; draöum - to see; icchämi - I
desire; käma-da - O fulfiller of desires; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vacanam -

[p.392]
words; tasya - His; vasanam - garment; samapäkarot - He took off; anävtam uncovered; käya-daëòam - body like a stick; tapta-cämékara-prabham effulgence like molten gold; ghana-äpäye - clouds disappearing; yathä - like;
meru-çìgam - the peak of Mount Meru; candra-kara - moon-beams; aïcitam honored.
"O Lord, fulfiller of desires, I have a desire to see Your transcendental body."
Hearing these words, Gauräìga took off His outer garment and revealed His slender
body, which possessed a glittering effulgence like molten gold. It appeared as if the
clouds had parted, revealing Mount Meru shining in the moonlight.

dtvä çrutvä namasktya / jagäma sa dvijottamaù
bhagavän api sahöo / jagäma puruottamam 37
dtvä - seeing; çrutvä - hearing; nama-ktya - offering obeisances; jagäma - He
went; sa - he; dvija-uttamaù - the exalted brähmaëa; bhagavän - the Lord; api also; sahöa - exultant; jagäma - He went; puruottamam - the Supreme Male.
Having seen Gaura, heard from Gaura, and offered obeisances to Gaura, that noble
brähmaëa departed, and then the all-opulent Lord also departed with great
jubilantion for Puruñottama Kñetra.

iti çrutvä hareù kérti / prayäëa puruottame
labhate parama-premänanda gaura-padämbuje 38
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; hareù - of Hari; kértim - glory; prayäëam - deparing;
puruottame - for Jagannätha Puré; labhate - He obtains; parama-prema - highest
love; änandam - bliss; gaura - of Gaura; pada-ambuje - for the lotus feet.
One who hears of Çré Hari's glorious departure for Puruñottama Dhäma obtains
parama-premänanda, the lofty pinnacle of blissful love for the lotus feet of the Lord.

puruottama-devasya / samyag-darçana-ja phalam
labheta manujo nitya / paöhanät tat-phala labhet 39

[p.393]
purua-uttama-devasya - of the Divinity of Puruñottama Dhäma; samyak complete; darçana-jam - born of seeing; phalam - fruit; labheta - one can get;
manuja - a man; nityam - regularly; paöhanät - by reciting; tat-phalam - that fruit;
labhet - one can get.
Whatever benefit is achieved by having directly darçana of Lord Jagannätha, the
master of Puruñottama Kñetra, a man can obtain simply by regularly reciting these
pastimes of Gaura Hari.

Thus ends the Fourth Sarga entitled "Pleasure Pastimes at the House of Çré
Advaita," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifth Sarga
daëòa-bhaïjanam
The Breaking of Mahäprabhu's Sannyäsa Staff

tataù pratasthe bhagavän mukunda- / gadädharädyair dvija-sajjanai
prabhuù
puro 'vadhuta praëidhäya devo / raräja kävyena yathoòupeçaù 1
tataù - then; pratasthe - He set out; bhagavän - the Lord; mukunda-gadädhara with Mukunda and Gadädhara; ädyai - and others; dvija-sajjanai - with the
saintly brähmaëas; prabhuù - the Master; pura - in front; avadhutam - the Lord
beyond social conventions; praëidhäya - placing; deva - the Divinity; raräja - He
shone; kävyena - with Kävya (Venus); yathä - like; uòupa-éçaù - lord of the stars
(the moon).

[p.394]
Thereafter, the Lord set forth together with Mukunda, Gadädhara, and other
saintly brähmaëas. He placed the avadhüta in front of the party and Himself just
behind him, and together they appeared like the radiant moon in conjunction with
Venus.

gacchan kvacid gäyati këa-géta / kvacid vaded artham alabdhasaìjïam
kvacid druta yäti çanaiù kvacid skhalad- / gati kvacit premavibhinna-dhairyyaù 2
gacchan - going; kvacit - sometimes; gäyati - He sings; këa-gétam - songs of
Kåñëa; kvacit - sometimes; vadet - He would tell; artham - meaning; alabdhasaìjïam - lost consciouness; kvacit - sometimes; drutam - swiftly; yäti - He goes;
çanaiù - slowly; kvacit - sometimes; skhalat-gati - stumbling gait; kvacit sometimes; prema-vibhinna-dhairyaù - composure broken by love.
While they travelled, at times Çré Gauräìga would sing songs of Kåñëa, and
sometimes He would explain their meaning. Sometimes He would faint; sometimes
He would run very swiftly, at other times walk slowly, and sometimes He would
walk with a stumbling gait because His composure was smashed to pieces by
ecstatic love for Kåñëa.

säya kvacid bhakyam upasthita bhavet / tad-annam açnäti harir
yathä-vidhi
rätrau ca gäyaty atha rauti dhairyya / visjya devo mahatä sukhäya
3
säyam - at dusk; kvacit - sometimes; bhakyam - edible food; upasthitam obtained; bhavet - it might be; tat-annam - food offered to Kåñëa; açnäti - He
eats; hari - the dispeller of evil; yathä-vidhi - according to etiquette; rätrau - at
night; ca - and; gäyati - He sings; atha - then; rauti - cries out; dhairyam patience; visjya - giving up; deva - the Lord; mahatäm - of the great souls;
sukhäya - for the happiness.

[p.395]
At evening, if some suitable food had been obtained, Gaura Hari would eat after it
was offered to Kåñëa. At night, abandoning sobriety, that Divine Person sang of Çré
Kåñëa and cried out for Him. Thus He brought happiness to the great souls
accompanying Him.

svaya papäöha bhagavän / çlokam eka çëuva tam
yat çrutvä tat-padämbhoje / ratiù syäd anapäyiné 4
svayam - personally; papäöha - taught; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; çlokam a verse; ekam - one; çëuva - please hear; tam - that; yat - which; çrutvä - hearing;
tat-pada-ambhoje - for the lotus feet; ratiù - attachment; syät - it may be;
anapäyiné - undeviating.
The Blessed Lord personally taught them one verse. Please hear it, for through it
one can obtain undeviating attachment for His lotus feet:

räma räghava räma räghava räma räghava pähi mäm
këa keçava këa keçava këa keçava trähi mäm 5
räma - O reservoir of pleasure!; räghava - O best of the Raghu dynasty!; pähi
mäm - protect me; kåñëa - O all-attractive Lord!; keçava - O Lord whose hair is
beautiful!; trähi mäm - preserve me.
O Räma! O Räghava! O Räma! O Räghava! O Räma! O Räghava! Please protect Me.
O Kåñëa! O Keçava! O Kåñëa! O Keçava! O Kåñëa! O Keçava! Please preserve Me.

eva kala-pada gäyan / hasas tattva-vidäm varaù
imän nu çikayan lokäë / lokänä pälako 'vyayah 6
evam - thus; kala-pada - melodious verse; gäyan - singing; hasan - laughing;
tattva-vidäm - of those who know the truth; varaù - the best; ime - these; nu indeed; çikayan - teaching; lokäë - the people; lokänäm - of the people; pälaka -

[p.396]
protector; avyayah - changeless.
With a melodious tone and smiling face, the greatest of sages, the eternal protector
of mankind, sang these two lines to instruct bhakti to the people in general.

pathikän yäcakän dövä / kvacid däné samägataù
ähüya tän nirvto 'bhüt / svayam eva gata-klamaù 7
pathikän - travellers; yäcakän - beggars; dövä - seeing; kvacit - sometimes; däné toll collector; samägataù - approached; ähüya - hailed; tän - them; nirvta happy; abhüt - he became; svayam - spontaneously; eva - indeed; gata-klamaù free of fatigue.
Sometimes a toll collector would approach them, taking them to be some travelling
beggars. Upon hailing them, that man would spontaneously feel joyful and free from
fatigue.

kadäcid aparo däné / pathi gatvä jagad-gurum
värayäm äsa dänärthé / yätrikäëä gaëair vtam 8
kadäcit - once; apara - another; däné - toll collector; pathi - on the path; gatvä going; jagat-gurum - the spiritual master of the worlds; värayäm äsa prohibited; däna-arthé - desirous of wealth; yätrikäëäm - of travellers; gaëai - by
groups; vtam - surrounded.
Once, another toll collector approached the jagad-guru, who was surrounded by
His fellow travellers on the path. This person was desirous to extract some money
from the party, and so he detained the Lord from continuing on.

tam äha bhagavän gaccha / düra tva kara-saìjïayä
tato 'gacchat tadäné sa / bhagavän mudito yayau 9
tam - him; äha - He said; bhagavän - the Lord; gaccha - you must go; düram -

[p.397]
far; tvam - you; kara-saìjïayä - with a wave of the hand; tata - then; agacchat he went; tadäném - then; sa - He; bhagavän - the Lord; mudita - joyously; yayau departed.
The Lord gestured with a wave of His hand, saying to that man, "Go far away from
here!" At that, the toll collector left them, and the illustrious Gaura went blissfully
on His way.

avadhüta-kare daëòa / dattvä svéya jagad-guruù
agre jagäma ca paçcät / nityänandaù çanair yayau 10
avadhüta-kare - in the hand of the avadhüta; daëòam - His staff; dattvä - gave;
svéyam - His own; jagat-guruù - the spiritual preceptor of the cosmos; agre - in
the front; jagäma - He went; ca - and; paçcät - afterwards; nitya-änandaù personified perpetual bliss; çanai - slowly; yayau - he went.
Once the guru of the universe placed His daëa in the avadhüta's hand and went
ahead, while Nityänanda walked slowly behind.

düyamänena manasäcintayat sa udära-dhéù
aha viharamäno 'sau / prabhur me daëòa-dhärakaù 11
düyamänena - with affliction; manasä - in His mind; acintayat - He thought; sa He; udära-dhéù - of broad intellect; aham - I; viharamäna - taking away; asau He; prabhu - the Master; me - My; daëòa-dhärakaù - bearer of a staff.
Munificent Nityänanda, His mind fraught with anguish, thought, "My Prabhu
carries a daëa, but I shall take it from Him.

asau çré-bhagavän säkäd / dçyate prajvalann alam
çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma-dharo devaù çriyänvitaù 12
asau - He; çré-bhagavän - the Lord; säkät - directly; dçyate - it is seen; prajvalan

[p.398]
- blazing brightly; alam - enough; çaìkha-cakra-gadä-padma-dhara - the bearer
of the conch, disc, club and lotus; devaù - the Divine Person; çriyä anvitaù - full
of opulence.
"One can easily understand Him to be the Supreme Lord, the reservoir of all
opulence, for His presence is brilliant like fire. He is the Supreme Divine Person. He
is filled with splendor, and eternally bears in His four hands the conch, disc, club
and lotus. Therefore, enough of this stick!

laukiké darçayaç ceöä / nyäsa-daëòa-dharo hariù
muralé-vädanaù pürva / jagan-mohana-rüpakaù 13
laukikém - ordinary; darçayan - showing; ceöäm - activities; nyäsa-daëòadharah - holding the staff of a renunciant; hariù - He who takes away sin; muralévadanaù - player of the muralé flute; pürvam - formerly; jagat-mohana-rüpakaù whose form bewilders all living entities.
"At present Çré Hari displays the behavior of an ordinary man, and therefore He
holds the staff of a renunciant. In His previous avatära, He played upon the muralé
flute and His form enchanted the mind of all living beings.

rädhä-rasa-viläsé ca / çré-hareù sannidhau sthitaù
ta dövä präha bhagavän / daëòa me dehi mäciram 14
rädhä-rasa-viläsé - who enjoys pastimes with Çré Rädhä; ca - and; çré-hareù - of
Çré Hari; sannidhau - in the presence; sthitaù - situated; tam - Him; dövä - seeing;
präha - He said; bhagavän - the Lord; daëòam - staff; me - My; dehi - give; mä not; ciram - a long time.
"Thus He enjoyed pleasure pastimes with Çré Rädhä." At that moment, Nityänanda
came alongside Çré Gaura Hari, who seeing Him, said, "Now give back My daëa."

avadhütas tata präha / daiväd bhümau pada mama
praskhalat tena daëòas te / bhagno bhétyety uväca saù 15

[p.399]
avadhüta - who is free from convention; tata - then; präha - he said; daivät - by
the divine will; bhümau - on the earth; padam - foot; mama - my; praskhalat slipping; tena - by that; daëòa - staff; te - Your; bhagna - broken; bhétyä - out of
fear; iti - thus; uväca - said; saù - He.
The avadhüta apprehensively replied, "By the design of Providence, while walking
my foot slipped upon the ground, and Your daëa snapped and is broken."

tataç cukopa bhagavän / avadhüta jagäda ca
daëòe me sasthitä deväù / çivädyäù saha çaktayaù 16
tata - then; cukopa - was angered; bhagavän - the Lord; avadhütam - who is
free from mundane convention; jagäda - said; ca - and; daëòe - on the staff; me My; sasthitä - situated; deväù - gods; çiva-ädyäù - headed by Çiva; saha - with;
çaktayaù - their potencies.
Becoming angry the Lord said to the avadhüta, "All the devas headed by Çiva
together with their çaktis resided on My daëa.

teä péòa vidhäya tva / babhaïja mama daëòakam
deva-péòäkta doa / no jänäsi kim alpakam 17
teäm - of them; péòam - pain; vidhäya - giving; tvam - You; babhaïja - broke;
mama - My; daëòakam - staff; deva-péòä-ktam - causing pain to the devas; doam a fault; na - not; u - indeed; jänäsi - you understand; kim - whether?; alpakam trifling.
"By breaking my daëa you have given them pain. Do you think that giving devatäs
pain is o no consequence?"

tat çrutvä präha ta devo / hita teä kta mayä
tataù kaëät tyakta-roo / bhagavän idam abravét 18

[p.400]
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; präha - He said; tam - Him; deva - the divinity;
hitam - benefit; teäm - their; ktam - done; mayä - by Me; tataù - then; kaëät after a moment; tyakta-roa - having given up anger; bhagavän - the Lord; idam this; abravét - said.
Hearing this, Nityänanda-deva replied, "I have rather done them great good." A
moment later, the Lord gave up His anger and said:

gatvä ca çré-jagannätha / dövä çré-puruñottamam
sthitvä katipaya mäsa / pärçve çré-cakriëo mayä 19
gatvä - having travelled; ca - and; çré-jagannätham - the splendid Lord of the
universe; dövä - seeing; çré-puruña-uttamam - that Supreme Male; sthitvä staying; katipayam - a few; mäsam - months; pärçve - at the side; çré-cakriëa - of
the wielder of the disc; mayä - by Me.
"When I have travelled to see Lord Jagannätha, the Supreme Male and wielder of
the cakra, I must stay a few months by His side.

nyäso daëòasya kartavyo / mamäsén matir édçé
tam asau ca babhaïjorvyä / kiptavän ki karomy aham 20
nyäsa - abandoning; daëòasya - of the staff; kartavya - should be done; mama My; asét - it was; mati - opinion; édçé - such; tam - that; asau - He; ca - but;
babhaïja - has broken; urvyäm - on the earth; kiptavän - thrown; ki - what?;
karomi - I do; aham - I.
"My daëa must be abandoned. Such is My opinion. Nityänanda has thrown it on
the ground and broken it. What else can I do?"

ity uktvä ta kroòé ktvä / proväca madhuräkaram
mad-abhipräyam eva tva / karttum arhasi sarvvadä 21

[p.401]
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; tam - Him; kroòé-ktvä - embracing; proväca - He said;
madhura-akaram - in charming accents; mat-abhipräyam - My desire; eva certainly; tvam - You; kartum - to do; arhasi - You ought; sarvadä - always.
So saying, He embraced Nityänanda and commanded Him in a charming tone,
"Always act in compliance with My wishes."

Thus ends the Fifth Sarga entitled "The Breaking of Mahäprabhu's Sannyäsa
Staff," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Sixth Sarga
dakiëa-deça-bhramaëam
The Lord Wanders in South India

ity uktvä prayayau devo / hari-kértana-tat-paraù
patha-sthä devatä dövä / natvä stutvä yathä-vidhi 1
iti - so; uktvä - saying; prayayau - He departed; deva - the Lord; hari-kértana in describing Hari in song; tat-paraù - wholly absorbed; patha-sthä - placed on
the path; devatä - Deities; dövä - seeing; natvä - bowing before; stutvä - praising;
yathä-vidhi - according to the scriptural precept.
So saying, Çré Chaitanya Mahäprabhu set forth again absorbed in Hari-kértana.
Whenever He saw Deities of the Lord or the devatäs on the road, He offer prostrated
obeisances and offer some prayer of praise according to the vidhi.
tamo-lipte mahä-puëye / hareù ketre jagad-guruù

brahma-kuëòe kåta-snäno / dadarça madhusüdanam 2

[p.402]
tamo-lipte - enveloped in darkness; mahä-puëye - very pious; hareù - of Hari;
ketre - in the land; jagat-guruù - spiritual master of the material world; brahmakuëòe - in the pond named Brahma-kuëa; kåta-snäna - took bath; dadarça - He
saw; madhu-südanam - the killer of Madhu.
In the very pious land of Hari Kñetra, which was enveloped by the darkness of
night, the jagad-guru took His bath in Brahma-kuëa and then took darçana of the
Deity of Madhusüdana.

tato jagäma bhagavän / dinaiù katipayaiù prabhuù
remuëäyä mahä-puryä / draöu gopäla-devakam 3
tata - then; jagäma - He went; bhagavän - the Lord; dinaiù katipayaiù - for a
few days; prabhuù - the Master; remuëäyäm - in Remunä; mahä-puryäm - in the
great town; draöum - to see; gopäla-devakam - the Deity of Gopäla.
Then Gaura Bhagavän went to the great town of Remunä and stayed for a few days
to see the Deity of Gopäla.

väräëasyäm uddhavena / sthäpita püjita purä
brähmaëänugrahärthäya / tatra gatvä sthita harim 4
väräëasyäm - in Väräëasé; uddhavena - by Uddhava; sthäpitam - established;
püjitam - worshipped; purä - before; brähmaëa - to a brähmaëa; anugrahaarthäya - in order to show mercy; tatra - there; gatvä - going; sthitam - staying;
harim - Hari.
Uddhava formerly established and worshipped that Deity in Väräëasé. Then to
show mercy to a certain brähmaëa, that Deity of Hari personally walked to Remuëä
and stayed there.

gopénätham iti kecid / ähus ta karuëä-nidhim

[p.403]
kéra-corädi-lélä yaç / cakära bhakta-hetave 5
gopé-nätham - Lord of the milkmaids; iti - thus; kecit - certain; ähu - they call;
tam - Him; karuëä-nidhim - ocean of mercy; kéra-corä - the thief of kñéra
(sweetened condensed milk); ädi - and so on; léläm - pastimes; ya - who; cakära He performed; bhakta-hetave - for the sake of His devotees.
Certain people gave that ocean of mercy the name Gopénätha, and for the sake of
His devotee, Mädhavendra Puré, He enacted many pastimes such as stealing kñéra
and so forth.

sarvva pramäëam evätra / bhakta-väkyänugo hariù
dadarça tatra gatväsau / bhagavän präkto yathä 6
sarvam - all; pramäëam - evidence; eva - certainly; atra - here; bhakta-väkya the words of His devotees; anuga - follower; hariù; dadarça - He saw; tatra there; gatvä - going; asau - this; bhagavän - all-opulent; präkta - material; yathä like.
Everything related to that place and the Deity of Gopénätha shows how Lord Hari
always fulfills the word of His devotee. acting like an ordinary man, Gaura Hari
went to that temple, and took darçana of the Deity.

daëòavad bhuvi nipatya sureça / ta praëamya karuëärdramukhenduù
narttana nija-janaiù saha cakre / kérttana sarasijäyata-netraù 7
daëòa-vat - like a rod; bhuvi - on the earth; nipatya - falling; sura-éçam - Lord
of godly beings; tam - Him; praëamya - offering obeisances; karuëä-ärdra - wet
with tears of humility; mukha-induù - face like a moon; nartanam - dancing; nijajanaiù - with His associates; saha - in company; cakre - performed; kértanam chanting; sarasi-ja - water-born, lotus; äyata - spread; netraù - eyes.

[p.404]
Gaura Prabhu, whose moon-like face is moistened with tears of mercy and whose
eyes are wide-spread like the petals of a lotus, fell flat like a rod before that Lord of
all gods and godly beings. Then He performed kértana and danced in the company of
His associates.

tat-kaëän mura-ripoù pratimäyä / mauli-lagna-mukuöa ca samäpa
tad avalokya kara-padma-yugena / tad dadhära sa çré-çacé-süta eaù
8
tat-kaëät - at that moment; mura-ripoù - from the enemy of Murä; pratimäyä of the Deity; mauli-lagna-mukuöa - the crown fixed on the head; ca - and;
samäpa - He received; tat - that; avalokya - gazing; kara-padma-yugena - with
His lotus hands; tat - that; dadhära - He held; sa - He; çré-çacé-süta - the glorious
son of Çacé; eaù - this.
At that moment, the resplendent son of Çacé received the ornamental crown of
flowers that had fallen from the head of Muräri. He gazed at it and then took the
crown into His lotus hands.
tat prasädam adhigatya sva-mürddhnä / sadadhära ca raräja ca höaù

adbhuta tam avalokya sureça / khe nananda nata-kandara-cittaù 9
tat - that; prasädam - grace; adhigatya - achieving; sva-mürdhnä - on his own
head; sadadhära - fixed nicely; ca - and; raräja - shone; ca - and; höaù - thrilled;
adbhutam - wonderful; tam - Him; avalokya - beholding; sura-éçam - Lord of the
gods; khe - in that holy place; nananda - rejoiced; nata-kandara-cittaù - with
bowed head and surrendered consciousness.
Having received this sign of Gopénätha's grace, He fixed that prasädam crown
nicely on His head, and His countenance shone in rapture. Gazing upon the Lord of
the gods, He bowed His head in humility and rejoiced in that holy place.

tatra ntyam akarod atula-çrér / nyäsinä vara-sudhäkara-käntiù
vaiëavaiù saha dinäntaram antaù / säyam eva viraräma mahätmä

[p.405]
10
tatra - then; ntyam - dance; akarot - He did; atula-çré - of incomparable beauty;
nyäsinäm - of renunciants; vara - the finest; sudhä-äkara - nectar-effusing
(moon); käntiù - effulgence; vaiëavaiù saha - together with the vaiñëavas; dinaantaram - throughout the day; antaù - ending; säyam - night; raräma - He
stopped; mahä-ätmä - munificent soul.
Then the munificent and incomparably lovely Lord Hari, whose effulgence
resembles nectarean moonbeams, who had accepted the role of the paramount
sannyäsé, danced and sang with the vaiñëavas from dawn until dusk.

tam vilokya muditä jana-saìghäs / tuöuvur muhur amu praçaçasuù
tatra so'pi rajané praëinäya / bhakyam annam upabhojya munéçaù
11
tam - Him; vilokya - looking at; muditä - joyous; jana-saìghä - groups of
people; tuöuvu - they extolled; muhu - repeatedly; amum - Him; praçaçasuù - they
praised; tatra - then; sa api - that very person; rajaném - night; praëinäya passing; bhakyam annam - suitable food; upabhojya - ate; muni-éçaù - Lord of
sages.
Crowds of people came there and avidly gazed at Him. Repeatedly they extolled
His qualities and offered Him prayers. Then, as night came the Lord of sages ate
some suitable foods.

prätar ambuja-mukhaù sa jagäma / deçam anya-nagaräëi
laìghayan
präpya kälam anu kambu-sukaëöho / veginé sura-nadé-jhara-cyutäm
12
präta - early; ambuja-mukhaù - lotus-faced; sa - He; jagäma - went; deçam country; anya-nagaräëi - other towns; laìghayan - crossing; präpya kälam - at a

[p.406]
proper time; anu - following; kambu-sukaëöha - beautiful neck like a conch;
veginém - swiftly flowing; sura-nadé - celestial river (Gaìgä); jhara-cyutäm separately springing.
Early in the morning, the Lord, whose face expands like a blossoming lotus, and
whose lovely throat with its three folds of skin resembles a conch, continued
walking and crossed other lands, passing many towns and villages along the way.
Then, at an auspicious moment, He came upon a fast-flowing river, a tributary of the
river of the gods.

tä vilokya vara-vaitaraëé sa / sarvva-pätaka-kula janatäyäù
darçanena yama-vaitaraëé sä / jätu bhäti kim u tat-snapanena 13
täm - her; vilokya - looking; vara-vaitaraëém - blessed deliverer; sa - He; sarvapätaka-kulam - aggregate of all sins; janatäyäù - of the populace; darçanena - by
the sight; yama-vaitaraëém - deliverer from the bonds of Yamaräja, the punisher
of the sinful; sä - she; jätu - at any time; bhäti - she shines; kim u - what to
speak?; tat-snapanena - by bathing in her.
He looked upon that blessed river named Vaitaraëé, who is capable of delivering
humanity from their sins. Simply by seeing her, one becomes liberated from the
punishments of Yamaräja; what then can be spoken of those who bathe in her
waters? She forever shines.

snänam atra vidhinä sa vidhäya / ta dadarça vara-çükara-rüpam
yasya darçana-vaçän manujänä / sapta-saptati-kula divam éyät 14
snänam - bath; atra - here; vidhinä - by rule of scripture; sa - He; vidhäya taking; ta - Him; dadarça - He saw; vara-çükara-rüpam - the beautiful form of a
boar; yasya - of whom; darçana-vaçät - by the influence of His sight; manujänäm
- of men; sapta-saptati-kulam - seventy-seven generations of one's family; divam heaven; éyät - it can go.
As Çacé-suta bathed there according to the Vedic precept, He saw a very beautiful

[p.407]
form of Lord Boar. Just by seeing Him, seventy-seven generations of a man's
ancestors enter into heaven.

tam vilokya muditaù sa jagäma / yäjapura-nagaré dvija-bhümim
yatra yajïam akaroc catur-mukhaù / çäsana dvija-varäya dadau ca
15
tam - Him; vilokya - seeing; muditaù - glad; sa - He; jagäma - went; yäjapura-of the name Yäjapura; nagarém - town; dvija-bhümim - land of brähmaëas; yatra where; yajïam - sacrifice; akarot - he performed; catu-mukhaù - four-faced Çré
Brahmä; çäsanam - instruction; dvija-varäya - to an exalted brähmaëa; dadau he gave; ca - and.
Gaura became enlivened at the Lord's sight, and He then travelled to the city of
Yäjapura, where many brähmaëas dwell. There the four-headed Lord Brahmä once
performed sacrifice and gave authority over that land to a noble brähmaëa.

yatra mtyum adhigamya tu viçväù / päpino 'pi çiva-rüpa-dharäù
syuù
tatra liìga-çataço hi samékya / çaìkarasya çirasänamad éçaù 16
yatra - where; mtyum - death; adhigamya - attained; tu - indeed; viçväù - all;
päpina - sinners; api - even; çiva-rüpa-dharäù - bear auspicious forms; syuù they may be; tatra - there; liìga-çataça - hundreds of Çiva liìgams; hi - verily;
samékya - carefully seeing; çaìkarasya - of Lord Çiva; çirasä - by the head;
anamat - He bowed; éçaù - the Lord.
All those even sinners who die in that place, attain auspicious forms at death.
While attentively seeing the hundreds of Çiva-liìgams at that place, the Lord bowed
His head.

sa jagäma virajä-mukha-padma- / darçanäya bhagavän
karuëäbdhiù

[p.408]
yä vilokya jagatä janu-koöi- / mätram agha hy akhila prajahäti 17
sa - He; jagäma - went; virajä-mukha-padma - the lotus face of Virajä, a sacred
river; darçanäya - for seeing; bhagavän - the Lord; karuëä-abdhiù - the ocean of
mercy; yäm - whom; vilokya - seeing; jagatä - of universes; janu - souls; koöi millions; mätram - simply; agham - sin; hi - surely; akhilam - completely;
prajahäti - she dispells.
The ocean of mercy, also took darçana of the river Virajä's lotus face, whose the
mere sight delivers millions of souls from their sins committed in the countless
materia worlds.

tä vilokya praëaman samayäcat / prema-bhaktim atulä jagad-éçaù
äjagäma gaya-näbhim anärghya / pait-tértham aravinda-mukheçaù
18
täm - her; vilokya - looking at; praëaman - with prostrated obeisances;
samayäcat - He begged humbly; prema-bhaktim - for loving devotion; atuläm matchless; jagat-éçaù - the Lord of all living beings; äjagäma - He went; gayanäbhim - to Gaya-näbhi; anärghyam - that which is priceless; pait-tértham - holy
place for service of the forefathers; aravinda-mukha - lotus-faced; éçaù - Lord.
The Lord of all living beings gazed upon her and offered obeisances, begging wholeheartedly for the matchless gift of prema-bhakti. Then the lotus-faced Lord went to
Gaya-näbhi, a priceless tértha for service to the forefathers.

brahma-kuëòa-payasi dvija-varyyaù / snänam äçu vidadhe vidhänavit
yatra yajïa-varäha-prakäça- / darçanena jagatä sukham äsét 19
brahma-kuëòa - of Brahma-kuëa; payasi - in the waters; dvija-varyaù - the best
of the twice-born; snänam - bath; äçu - quickly; vidadhe - took; vidhäna-vit - wise
in precept; yatra - where; yajïa-varäha - Lord Boar, the form of sacrifice;

[p.409]
prakäça-darçanena - by seeing the revelation; jagatäm - of the universes; sukham happiness; äsét - there was.
Çré Hari, the best of the twice-born, who is the most learned in spiritual principles,
quickly bathed in the waters of Brahma-kuëa. There all the worlds became happy to
see the form of yajïa personified which was once shown by Lord Varäha.

babhräma tatra bhagavän nagaré nirékya / bhüteça-liìgam avalokya
mahänubhävaù
väräëasém iva sadäçiva-räja-dhäné / yatra trilocana-mukhäù çivaliìga-koöiù 20
babhräma - He wandered; tatra - there; bhagavän - the Lord; nagarém - city;
nirékya - seeing; bhüta-éça-liìgam - the phallic form of the Lord of the ghosts,
Çiva; avalokya - seeing; mahä-anubhävaù - magnanimous; väräëasém iva - like
Väräëasé; sadä-çiva-räja-dhäném - the capital city of Sadäçiva; yatra - where; trilocana-mukhäù - three-eyed face; çiva-liìga-koöiù - millions of Çiva liìgas.
The magnanimous Lord wandered throughout the town, seeing the liìgams of
Bhüteça, the lord of all beings. The place appeared like Väräëasé, the capital city of
Sadäçiva, where there are a million liìgams of the three-eyed lord.

çrutvä harer idam ananta-sukha labheta / puëyä kathä sakala-päpaharä manuyaù
térthäöanasya ca phala pit-tértha-sarvva- / yajïa-kriyä-phalam açeaguëänvitaù syät 21
çrutvä - hearing; hare - of Hari; idam - this; ananta-sukham - limitless bliss;
labheta - one can achieve; puëyäm kathäm - pure narration; sakala-päpa-haräm takes away all sin; manuyaù - a man; tértha - holy bathing place; äöanasya - of
travelling; ca - and; phalam - the result; pit-tértha - holy place of the forefathers;
sarva-yajïa-kriyä - all sacrifial performances; phalam - the result; açea complete; guëa-anvitaù - filled by good qualities; syät - it can be.

[p.410]
By hearing attentively this sanctified narration of Çré Hari, which frees one from all
sinful reaction, a person obtains the fruit of travelling on pilgrimage to the holy
place of the forefathers as well as the benefit of sacrificial activities performed there.
One experiences limitless happiness and becomes graced with all good qualities.

Thus ends the Sixth Sarga entitled "The Lord Wanders in South India," in the
Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Seventh Sarga
çré-virajä-darçaëam
The Lord Takes Darçana of Çré Virajä

tataù praëamya ta bhaktyä / mukundo 'mbaöha éçvaram
präha praphulla-vadanaù / sa-hara jagad-éçvaram 1
tataù - then; praëamya - offering obeisances; tam - to Him; bhaktyä - with
devotion; mukunda; ambaöha - the physician; éçvaram - the Supreme Lord; präha
- he said; praphulla-vadanaù - blossoming face; sa-haram - with joy; jagatéçvaram - the Lord of the cosmic manifestation.
Bowed down with devotion to the joyous Lord of the universe, the physician
Mukunda with a blossoming face addressed Him:

bhagavann atra näste vai / dänino bhayam aëv api
jänämi sarvvato lokän / ye vasanty atra durmmadän 2
bhagavan - O Lord; atra - here; na aste - there is not; vai - verily; dänina - toll

[p.411]
collectors; bhayam - fear; aëu api - even the slightest; jänämi - I know; sarvata on all sides; lokän - the people; ye - who; vasanti - they dwell; atra - here;
durmadän - wicked.
"Lord, in this place there not the slightest reason to fear toll collectors. I
personally know the people of this region who are corrupt."

tat çrutvä bhagavän präha / smita-känta-navänanaù
etävad bhayam asmäka / pälana bhavatä ktam 3
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the Lord; präha - said; smita-känta bright smiles; nava - expressiveness; ananaù - face; etävat - so much; bhayam fear; asmäkam - for us; pälanam - protector; bhavatä - by your grace; ktam done.
Hearing this, the Lord replied with His expressive face filled with bright smiles,
"Yes, there is so much danger for us, but you are our protector."

ity uktvä prayayau bhikä / kartu lokeu çikayä
lakmé-känta svaya këo / nyäsé-vaça-dharo hariù 4
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; prayayau - He went forth; bhikäm - for begging alms;
kartum - to do; lokeu - amongst the people; çikayä - with the purpose of
teaching; lakmé-känta - the lover of the goddess of fortune; svayam - in Person;
këa; nyäsé-vaça-dhara - holding the bamboo rod of a renunciant; hariù - the
remover of evil.
So saying, He went out to beg alms, just to teach humility to others through His
example. He is Çré Kåñëa Himself, the lover of Mahä-Lakñmé, yet as Çré Kåñëa
Caitanya, He now bears a sannyäsa-daëa.

nityänandävadhütaç ca / sarvva-çakti-samanvitaù
çrémad-gadädharo vipro / mukundädyäç ca sajjanäù 5

[p.412]
jagmur bhikätane nätra / däné tän apy avarjjayat
baddhvä mukunda sarakya / dinam evänayat krudhä 6
nityänanda; avadhüta - unattached to convention; ca - and; sarva-çaktisamanvitaù - filled with all potencies; çrémat-gadädhara - the energy of a
devotee; vipra - the learned brähmaëa; mukunda - the physician; ädyä - headed
by; ca - and; sajjanäù - the saints; jagmu - they went; bhika - alms; aöane roaming; na - not; atra - here; däné - the toll-collector; tän - them; api - however;
avarjayat - he would not leave them alone; baddhä - bound; mukundam - the
angel-like singer; sarakya - keeping under custody; dinam - for the day; eva indeed; anayat - led; krudhä - angry.
Çré Nityänanda-avadhüta , the master of all çaktis, and Çré Gadädhara, the learned
scholar, as well as Mukunda and the other saintly devotees also went their own
ways and wandered about the town begging alms. However, a toll-collector would
not allow them to do so. He angrily captured Mukunda and bound him up, keeping
him prisoner for the whole day.

tataù säyähna-veläyä / ghétvä kambalottamam
mocayäm äsa tän sarvvän / tato vimanaso yayuù 7
tataù - then; säyähna-veläyäm - at the junction of day and night; ghétvä having accepted; kambala-uttamam - a valuable blanket; mocayäm äsa - he
released; tän - them; sarvän - all; tata - then; vimanasa - dejected; yayuù - they
departed.
At dusk, that man accepted a valuable blanket as payment and finally released
them all. Then the devotees departed from that place dejectedly.

te gatvä brähmaëän bhikä / ktvä bubhujire tataù
nityänando mahä-tejäù / kena lakyaù svaya prabhuù 8

[p.413]
te - they; gatvä - went; brähmaëän - some brähmaëas; bhikäm - alms; ktvä took; bubhujire - they could eat; tataù - then; nityänanda; mahä-tejäù - very
powerful; kena - by what?; lakyaù - symptoms; svayam - Himself; prabhuù - the
master.
The devotees then went to beg alms from some brähmaëas, and while they ate,
they wondered, "How can we find the very powerful Nityänanda and Gaura
Prabhu?"

tatas te maëòapa jagmuù / çayanärtha dvijäçrame
nityänando hasan baddhaù / taträgata udära-dhéù 9
tata - then; te - they; maëòapam - raised platform; jagmuù - they went; çayanaartham - in order to rest; dvija-äçrame - at a brähmaëa's hermitage; nitya-änanda
- the ever-blissful Lord; hasan - laughing; baddham - at the binding; tatra - there;
ägata - came; udära-dhéù - noble intelligence.
Next they went to take rest on a raised platform beneath a tree at the äçrama of the
brähmaëas. When the magnanimous Nityänanda finally arrived there, He laughed to
hear the story of the bhaktas' arrest.

tatraiva bhagavän bhikä / ktvä svayam upasthitaù
ta döväkathayat sarvva / dänibhir yat kta balät 10
tatra - then; eva - certainly; bhagavän - the Lord; bhikäm - alms; ktvä - having
accomplished; svayam - by His own desire; upasthitaù - arrived; tam - Him; dövä seeing; akathayat - related; sarvam - all; dänibhi - by the toll-collectors; yat which; ktam - done; balät - by force.
Then having collected His bhikña, Çré Gaura Bhagavan arrived by His own desire.
Seeing Him, the bhaktas described to Him all that the toll-collectors had done by
force.

tat çrutvä bhagavän tiöha / bhadra bhadra bhaviyati

[p.414]
tadéyä çakté räjäna / preayäm äsa sa-tvaram 11
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; bhagavän - the all-opulent; tiöha - wait; bhadram
bhadram - all auspicious; bhaviyati - it will be; tadéyäm - His; çaktém - energy
(Gadädhara); räjänam - to the king; preayämäsa - He sent; sa-tvaram - quickly.
Hearing this, the Lord said, "Just wait! Everything will come out for the best."
Then He quickly sent Çré Gadädhara, His internal potency, to summon the king.

tat-kaëäö tatra dänéçaù / samägatya padämbujam
harer vvavanda ta prähur / mukundädyä mahattamäù 12
tat-kaëäö - at that moment; tatra - there; dänéçaù - the master of the toll
collectors; samägatya - approached; pada-ambujam - the lotus feet; hare - of
Hari; vavanda - and offered praises; tam - him; prähu - they told; mukunda-ädyä Mukunda and the others; mahattamäù - greatest of souls.
However at that very moment the master of all the toll-collectors arrived there and
offered praise at the lotus feet of Çré Hari. The great souls headed by Mukunda
informed him of what had happened to them.

präha ca tat-kte sarvvän / daëòaväöa-sthitän janän
prahariyämi tän duöän / na kariyanti te yathä 13
präha - he said; ca - and; tat-kte - on this account; sarvän - all; daëòaväöasthitän - subjected to the rod of chastisement; janän - people; prahariyämi - I
shall beat; tän - these; duöän - rogues; na - not; kariyanti - they will do; te - they;
yathä - thus.
The king said, "For this wrong done to you, I shall beat those rogues very well with
canes so they will never again behave in this way."

tad-bhtyair yat kta karma / tat çrutvä duùkhito 'bhavat

[p.415]
dänéçaù kambala nütna / bahu-mülya pradattavän 14
tat-bhtyai - by his servants; yat - what; ktam - done; karma - deed; tat - that;
çrutvä - hearing; duùkhita - aggrieved; abhavat - he became; däné-éçaù - the
master of the toll-collectors; kambalam - blanket; nütnam - new; bahu-mülyam very valuable; pradattavän - presented.
The master of the tax-collectors became much aggrieved to hear of the misdeeds
performed by his servants, and he presented the devotees with a very valuable new
blanket.

ity uktvä praëaman so 'pi / gataù sva-gham ddhimat
sarvva tyaktvä harer päda / cintayäm äsa çuddha-dhéù 15
iti - thus; uktvä - saying; praëaman - bowing down; sa api - the king himself;
gataù - went; sva-gha - His house; ddhimat - opulent; sarvam - all; tyaktvä - given
up; hare pädam - the feet of Gaura Hari; cintayäm äsa - he thought; çuddha-dhéù of purified intelligence.
After he had spoken thus, the king offered obeisances to the Lord and departed for
his opulent mansion. Thenceforward, he abandoned all material pursuits to take to
the service of Gaura Hari's feet, upon which he meditated with a pure heart.

eva teäm cäbhimäna / çamayitvä niçä sukham
suptä ninäya deveçaù / prätar utthäya sa-tvaraù 16
jagäma virajäm draöu / sarvva-lokaika-pävaném
yä dövä çraddhayä bhaktyä / mucyate bhava-bandhanät 17
evam - thus; teäm - of them; ca - and; abhimänam - minds; çamayitvä conciliated; niçäm - night; sukham - happily; suptä - rested; ninäya - passed; devaéçaù - Lord of the gods; präta - early; utthäya - rising; sa-tvaraù - quickly; jagäma
- He went; virajäm - sacred river in Orissa; draöum - to see; sarva-loka - all

[p.416]
people; eka-pävaném - sole purifier; yäm - whom; dövä - seeing; çraddhayä - with
faith; bhaktyä - with devotion; mucyate - he is released; bhava-bandhanät - from
the bondage.
Now that their minds had been pacified, the devotees peacefully rested that night.
Then at dawn, the Lord of the gods arose and swiftly departed to see again the river
Virajä, who fully capable of purifying all people. One who sees her with devotion
and faith is freed from bondage to birth and death.

bhagavad-darçane yädk / phalam äpnoti mänavaù
tädk phalam aväpnoti / virajä-mukha-darçane 18
bhagavat-darçane - in seeing the Lord; yädk - as; phalam - benefit; äpnoti - he
obtains; mänavaù - a man; tädk - so; phalam - benefit; aväpnoti - he obtains;
virajä-mukha-darçane - through seeing the face of Virajä.
The same benefit a man obtains by direct audience of the Supreme Lord can be
obtained simply by looking on the face of Virajä.

yaträsti bhagavän devaù / säkät çrémat-tri-locanaù
käçyä vä virajäyä vä / mtir moka-pradäyiné 19
yatra - where; asti - there is; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; devaù - divinity;
säkät - in person, çrémat-tri-locanaù - graced by three eyes; käçyäm - in
Väräëasé; vä - or; virajäyäm - in Virajä; vä - or; mti - death; moka-pradäyiné - the
bestower of liberation.
The illustrious Lord Çiva, whose countenance is graced by three eyes, is personally
present here. One who dies in Käçé or in Virajä is blessed with liberation.

väräëasyä mte yädk / prétim äpnoti çaìkaraù
tato 'dhikatarä prétir / virajäyä mte bhavet 20

[p.417]
väräëasyäm - in Väräëasé; mte - death; yädk - as; prétim - love; äpnoti - he gets;
çaìkaraù - the peacemaker; tata - then; adhikatarä - better; préti - love;
virajäyäm - in Virajä; mte - dead; bhavet - it may be.
As Çaìkara becomes pleased with one who dies in Väräëasé, he is still more
pleased if one dies in Virajä.

tä dtvä prayayau këah / sarvva-lokaika-pävanaù
këa-saìkérttana ktvä / bhakta-varga-samanvitaù 21
täm - her; dtvä - seeing; prayayau - went forth; këah - Kåñëa Caitanya; sarvaloka - all people; eka - only; pävanaù - savior; këa-saìkértanam - congregational
chanting; ktvä - performed; bhakta-varga - group of devotees; samanvitaù together with.
After seeing her, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, who is Himself the sole purifier of all worlds,
again departed on the path performing Kåñëa-näma-saìkértana with the bhaktas.

Thus ends the Seventh Sarga entitled "The Lord Takes Darçana of Çré Virajä,"
in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eighth Sarga
mahädeva-darçana
Darçana of Mahädeva

tataù prayäto dvija-räja-vikramaù / krameëa yaträkhila-loka-pälaiù
ekämrakäkhye girijä-samanvito / giréça-devo giri-räja-mürddhani 1

[p.418]
tataù - then; prayäta - set forth; dvija-räja-vikramaù - powerful king of the
twice-born; krameëa - gradually; yatra - where; akhila-loka-pälaiù - by the
protectors of all the planets; ekämraka-äkhye - named Ekämraka; girijäsamanvita - with the daughter of the Himaläyas; giri-éça-deva - the lord of the
best of mountains; giri-räja-mürdhani - on the top of the best of mountains.
The powerful king of the twice-born again set forth and gradually He came to the
place named Ekämraka. There on the summit of the best of mountains resides Çiva,
the master of mountains, accompanied by Pärvaté, the daughter of Mount Himälaya,
with all the demigods.

dadarça taträkhila-çobhayojjvala / calat-patäkam çiva-mandira
mahat
sudhävalipta vara-çìgam unnata / su-toraëa çveta-girim iväparam 2
dadarça - He saw; tatra - there; akhila-çobhayä - by all beauty; ujjvalam brilliant; calat-patäkam - flapping flag; çiva-mandiram - temple of Çiva; mahat great; sudhä - nectar; avaliptam - anointed; vara-çìgam - excellent pinnacle;
unnatam - lofty; su-toraëam - fine arches; çveta-girim - white mountain; iva like; aparam - another.
There He saw a great temple of Çiva, brilliant with all kinds of exquisite
craftmanship and finely sculpted arches. Crowning its lofty pinnacle flew a flag
which flapped in the breeze. That temple was anointed by celestial nectar, and
appeared like a snow-capped Himälayan mountain.

nipatya bhümau praëanäma devaù / çivälaya çüla-vicitra-cüòam
patäkayä näka-nadé-vibhaìga / dadhat samärohati helayeva 3
nipatya - falling down; bhümau - on the earth; praëanäma - He offered
obeisances; devaù - the Lord; çiva-älayam - the abode of Çiva; çüla - of a trident;
vicitra-cüòam - astonishing crest; patäkayä - by the flag; näka-nadé - of the
celestial river; vibhaìgam - curved; dadhat - holding; samärohati - it mounted;
helayä - frolicking; iva - like.

[p.419]
Falling to the earth, the Lord offered obeisances to that abode of Çiva and to the
astonishing trident cresting its dome. The curved and waving flag which fluttered in
the vault of heaven above it appeared to be a frolicking wave of the celestial Gaìgä.

tato jagämeçvara-darçanäya / puré puräreù parayä mudä saù
vasanti yatreçvara-liìga-koöyo / viçveçvarädyäç ca su-puëya-térthäù
4
tata - then; jagäma - He went; éçvara-darçanäya - in order to see Çré Çiva; purém
- the city; pura-areù - of the enemy of the cities of the demons, Çré Çiva; parayä with great; mudä - with joy; saù - He; vasanti - they reside; yatra - where; éçvaraliìga - of the sacred phallic forms of Çiva; koöya - millions; viçveçvara-ädyä headed by Viçveçvara; ca - and; su-puëya-térthäù - very holy places.
Then with great elation He entered the city of Lord Puräri desiring to see the vision
of that great I~çvara. There many térthas reside, presided over by millions of Çivaliìgams headed by the liìgam named Viçveçvara.

präsäda-koöyo vara-toraëäòhyä / räjanti räjac-cala-cela-cüòäù
ämukta-bhüä manujä manojïa- / gandhärccitä indra-padärpitehäù 5
präsäda-koöya - millions of temples; vara-toraëa-äòhyä - enriched by fine
arches; räjanti - they shine; räjat - glittering; cala-cela - waving flags; cüòäù crests; ämukta-bhüä - pearl-ornaments; manujä - men; manojïa-gandha - with
enchanting scents; arcitä - enhanced; indra-pada - of the post of Indra; arpita for the boon; ihäù - endeavoring.
Great numbers of brilliant palaces shone, enriched with beautiful archways and
crested by bright waving flags, wherein men adorned with pearls and enhanced with
pleasing scents endeavor to attain the post of Indra.

térthäni koöyo maëikarëikädyä / vasanti yaträçu vimukta-dehäù

[p.420]
gacchanti niùçreyasam ugra-yogair / ya yogino yänti catur-yugena 6
térthäni - holy places; koöya - great numbers; maëikarëikä-ädyä - headed by
Maëi-karëikä; vasanti - they dwell; yatra - where; äçu - swiftly; vimukta-dehäù liberated from the body; gacchanti - they go; niùçreyasam - the ultimate benefit,
Lord Çiva; ugra-yogai - by severe yoga practices; yam - whom; yogina - the yogés;
yänti - they go; catur-yugena - in the four ages.
In that region are also countless térthas, headed by Maëi-karëikä, where
throughout the four ages persons liberated from bodily identification attain to the
highest transcendental benefit of Lord Viëu's lotus feet by practicing severe yogic
disciplines.

bindün samähtya samasta-térthät / kta mahäbindu-sarovaräkhyam
kuëòa kta deva-vareëa yatra / snänäl labhec caiva pada viçuddham
7
bindün - drops; samähtya - collecting; samasta-térthät - from all the holy
places; ktam - done; mahä - great; bindu-sarovara - the lake of drops; äkhyam known; kuëòam - pond; ktam - made; deva-vareëa - by the best of gods; yatra where; snänät - by bathing; labhet - one can achieve; ca - and; eva - indeed;
padam - position; viçuddham - transcendentally pure.
There was also the vast lake Bindu-sarovara, so named because the best among the
gods had placed within it bindus, drops of water gathered from all the térthas.
Simply by bathing in that lake, one also obtains the transcendentally pure
destination of the Lord's lotus feet.

käçé vihäyäçu viçuddha-vikramo / väsäya yaträkhila-tértha-puëyän
ähüya tat-ketra-vare vareëyaù / sasthäpayäm äsa maheça-devaù 8
käçém - Väräëasé; vihäya - giving up; äçu - quickly; viçuddha - absolutely pure;
vikrama - he who has the power; väsäya - in order to reside; yatra - where;

[p.421]
akhila-tértha-puëyän - all the holy places; ähüya - calling; tat-ketra-vare - in that
excellent place; vareëyaù - the venerable Lord; sasthäpayäm äsa - established;
mahä-éça-devaù - the great controller, Lord Çiva.
Suddenly giving up His residence in the city of Käçé, the venerable Maheça, whose
power is fully free of mundane inebriety, has taken residence in that excellent place
of Ekämraka, where He has summoned and established all the holy places.

sa ktti-väsäù svayam eva devaù / sa liìga-rüpé vasatéçvaré ca
bhuìkte svaya bhoga-varän açeän / divyän yaténdrair
abhivandyamänaù 9
sa - he; ktti-väsäù - dressed in tiger-skin; svayam - himself; eva - indeed; devaù the lord; sa - he; liìga-rüpé - in the form of his phallic symbol; vasati - he lives;
éçvaré - the goddess Pärvaté; ca - also; bhuìkte - he enjoys; svayam - in person;
bhoga-varän - sublime pleasures; açeän - unlimited; divyän - divine; yaté-indrai by the best of saints; abhivandyamänaù - praised.
That very lord, dressed in tiger-skin, who expands in the form of his liìgam, enjoys
limitless divine delights in the company of goddess I~çvaré. Yet he is earnestly
offered praise by the best of renunciants who are fully detached from the pleasures
of the senses.

su-gandha-mälyair vara-candra-vartti- / dépävalébhiù
samalaìktäìgam
mdaìga-ghoair vara-çaìkha-nädair / ddevébhir äntya-paräbhir
äòhyäm 10
su-gandha-mälyai - by fragrant garlands; vara-candra - lovely moons; varti surrounded; dépa-ävalébhiù - by rows of lamps; samalaìkta-aìgam - body fully
ornamented; mdaìga-ghoai - by the sounds of mådaìga; vara-çaìkha-nädai - by
the pure sounds of the conch; devébhi - by goddesses; äntya-paräbhi - with
excellent dancing; äòhyäm - enhanced.

[p.422]
His body was completely decorated with fragrant flower garlands, and he was
surrounded by rows of luminous moon-like lamps. The atmosphere was enhanced
by the sounds of mdaìga and conch, and goddesses danced superbly with great
devotion.

viveça bhtyair bhavana puräreù / sudhäçu-gaurasya hariù pareçaù
yathä mahendrasya mahotsaväòhyä / padmodbhavaù këa-padäbjabhìgaù 11
viveça - He entered; bhtyai - with His servants; bhavanam - the house; puraareù - of Çiva, the enemy of the demoniac cities; sudhä-açu-gaurasya - of the
white nectar-rayed moon; hariù - the remover of sin; para-éçaù - the Supreme
Lord; yathä - as; mahä-indrasya - of great Lord Indra; mahä-utsava - great
festival; äòhyäm - enriched; padma-udbhavaù - born of the lotus; këa-pada-abja Kåñëa's lotus feet; bhìgaù - a bee.
Surrounded by His servants, the Supreme Lord Gaura Hari entered the house of
Puräri, whose form emanated white rays of nectar like the moon, in the same way
that Lord Brahmä, who resembles a bee at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, once entered the
festival-enlivened abode of mighty Indra-deva.

sa ktti-väsa çirasä vavanda / niväsa-deha bhuvi daëòavat svam
girä giréça ca sa-gadgadena / tuöäva sahöa-tanü rathäìgé 12
sa - He; ktti-väsam - dressed in tiger-skin; çirasä - with the head; vavanda bowed; niväsa- deha - whose body is his only home; bhuvi - on the earth; daëòavat - like a rod; svam - own; girä - with words; giri-éçam - lord of the mountainking's daughter; ca - and; sa-gadgadena - with faltering voice; tuöäva - He
praised; sahöa-tanu - body thrilled; ratha-aìgé - who carries the wheel of a
chariot.
Gauräìga bowed His head low and fell like a rod to the earth in front of that tigerskin-dressed ascetic, whose only residence was his body. Then Lord Hari, who

[p.423]
wields a chariot-wheel as His weapon, with a faltering voice and His entire body
thrilled by ecstacy, offered the following prayers of praise to the lord of the
mountains:

Çré Çiväöakam
composed by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu

namo namas te tri-daçeçvaräya / bhütädi-näthäya mòäya nityam
gaìgä-taraìgotthita-bäla-candra-cüòäya gauré-nayanotsaväya 13
nama nama - repeated obeisances; te - to you; tri-daça-éçvaräya - to the lord of
the 30 principal demigods; bhüta - of all beings; ädi-näthäya - unto the primeval
lord; mòäya - to the gracious one; nityam - perpetually; gaìgä-taraìga - the
waves of the Gaìgä; utthita - arises; bäla-candra - by the new moon; cüòäya crested; gauré - for the goddess Gauré (the fairest of women); nayana-utsaväya to the festival for the eyes.
"I perpetually offer obeisances unto you, the lord of the thirty primal devas, who
are the original father of created beings, whose character is gracious, upon whose
head, which is crested by the sickle moon, the Gaìgä springs, and who are a festival
for the eyes of Gauré, the fair goddess.

su-tapta-cämékara-candra-néla-padma-pravälämbuda-känti-vastraiù
suntya-raìgeöa-vara-pradäya / kaivalya-näthäya va-dhvajäya 14
su-tapta - molten; cämékara - gold; candra - moon; néla-padma - blue lotus;
praväla - budding; ambuda - cloud; känti - luster; vastraiù - with garments; sa he; ntya-raìga - of pleasure-dancing; iöa - desired; vara-pradäya - to you who
bestow the boon; kaivalya-näthäya - to the lord of the monists; va-dhvajäya - to
he whose flag bears a bull.
"I offer my obeisances to you who resemble a moon of molten gold, who are

[p.424]
dressed in garments colored like a group of budding blue lotuses or lustrous
rainclouds, who bestow the most desirable boon to your devotees by your delightful
dancing, who offer shelter to those who seek to become one with the transcendental
effulgence of Godhead, and whose flag bears the image of the bull.

sudhäçu-süryägni-vilocanena / tamo-bhide te jagataù çiväya
sahasra-çubhräçu-sahasra-raçmi-sahasra-saïjittvara-tejase 'stu 15
sudhä-açu - nectar-rayed (moon); sürya - sun; agni - fire; vilocanena - by your
eyes; tamo-bhide - the dissipater of darkness; te - to you; jagataù - of the cosmos;
çiväya - for auspiciousness; sahasra - a thousand; çubhra-açu - white-rayed
(moon) sahasra-raçmi - the thousand-rayed sun; sahasra - a thousand; saïjit completely defeated; tvara - swift; tejase - to you whose power; astu - let it be.
"I offer my obeisances to you who dispel darkness with your three eyes - the
moon, the sun, and fire - and thus cause auspiciousness for all the living entities of
the universe, and whose potency easily defeats thousands of moons and suns.

nägeça-ratnojjvala-vigrahäya / çärddüla-carmäçuka-divya-tejase
sahasra-patropari sasthitäya / varäìgadämukta-bhuja-dvayäya 16
näga-éça - the king of snakes; ratna - gems; ujjvala - luminous; vigrahäya - to
you whose form; çärdüla-carma - skins of tigers; açuka - garments; divya-tejase to you of divine potency; sahasra-patra-upari - upon a thousand-petalled lotus;
sasthitäya - to you who stand; vara-aìgada - with beautiful bangles; ämukta dressed; bhuja-dvayäya - to you whose two arms are such.
"I offer my obeisances to you, whose form is brilliantly illuminated by the jewels
of Ananta-deva, the king of snakes, who possess divine potencies and are clothed in
a tiger-skin, who stands in the midst of a thousand-petalled lotus, and whose two
arms are adorned by lustrous bangles.

su-nüpuräraïjita-päda-padma-karat-sudhä-bhtya-sukha-pradäya
vicitra-ratnaugha-vibhüitäya / premänam evädya harau vidhehi 17

[p.425]
su-nüpura - fine anklebells; äraïjita - reddish; päda-padma - lotus feet; karat flowing; sudhä - nectar; bhtya - to your servants; sukha-pradäya - to you who
give joy; vicitra - wonderful; ratna-ogha - a multitude of jewels; vibhüitäya - to
you who are adorned; premänam - love; eva - certainly; adya - today; harau - for
Hari; vidhehi - You should endow.
"I offer my obeisances to you who bestow happiness to your servitors as you pour
upon them the liquid nectar flowing from your reddish lotus feet, upon which
charming anklebells ring. Obeisances unto you who are adorned by an abundance of
gems. Please endow Me today with pure love for Çré Hari.

çré-räma govinda mukunda çaure / çré-këa näräyaëa väsudeva
ity ädi-nämämta-päna-matta-bhìgädhipäyäkhila-duùkha-hantre 18
çré-räma - O splendid reservoir of pleasure!; govinda - O awarder of delight to
the cows, the senses and the land!; mukunda - O giver of liberation!; çaure - O
hero!; çré-këa - O all-attractive!; nära-ayaëa - O shelter of mankind!; väsudeva O all-pervading Lord, son of Vasudeva!; iti - thus; ädi - headed by; näma-amta nectarean names; päna - drinking; matta - intoxicated; bhìga - bee; adhipäya unto the monarch; akhila - all; duùkha-hantre - unto the slayer of grief.
"`O Çré Räma! O Govinda! O Mukunda! O Çauri! O Çré Kåñëa! O Näräyaëa! O
Väsudeva!' I offer my obeisances unto you, Çré Çiva, who are the monarch ruling
over all the bee-like devotees who are mad to drink the nectar of these and other
innumerable names of Hari, and who thus destroys all grief.

çré-näradädyaiù satata sugopya-jijïäsitäyäçu vara-pradäya
tebhyo harer bhakti-sukha-pradäya / çiväya sarvva-gurave namaù
19
çré-närada-ädyaiù - by those headed by Närada Muni; satatam - always; sugopya - very confidential; jijïäsitäya - to you who are inquired of; äçu - easily;
vara-pradäya - to you who give boons; tebhya - to them; hare - of Lord Hari;

[p.426]
bhakti-sukha-pradäya - to you who give the joy of devotional service; çiväya - to
the auspicious; sarva-gurave - to the guru of all; namaù - obeisances.
"I offer my respectful obeisances to you, Çré Çiva, who are forever inquired of
confidentially by Çré Närada and other great sages, who very easily bestow boons on
them, who bestow the happiness of Hari-bhakti to those who seek boons of you,
who thereby create auspiciousness and are thus the guru of everyone.

çré-gauré-netrotsava-maìgaläya / tat-präëa-näthäya rasa-pradäya
sadä samutkaëöha-govinda-lélä-gäna-pravéëäya namo 'stu tubhyam
20
çré-gauré-netra - for the eyes of Çré Gauré; utsava-maìgaläya - to you who are
an auspicious festival; tat-präëa-näthäya - to the lord of Gauré's life breath; rasapradäya - to the giver of rasa; sadä - always; samutkaëöha - with great longing;
govinda-lélä - of the pastimes of Govinda; gäna-pravéëäya - to the expert singer;
nama - obeisances; astu - let there be; tubhyam - to you.
"I offer my obeisances to you who are a festival of auspiciousness for the eyes of
Gauré, who are the lord of her life-energy, who bestow rasa and are expert in forever
singing songs with eagerness of the pastimes of Govinda."

* * *
etat çivasyäöakam adbhuta mahat / çëvan hari-prema labheta
çéghram
jïäna ca vijïänam apürvva-vaibhava / yo bhäva-pürëaù parama
samädaram 21
etat - this; çivasya - of Çiva; aöakam - eight verses; adbhutam - astonishing;
mahat - great; çëvan - hearing; hari-prema - love for Hari; labheta - one can get;
çéghram - swiftly; jïänam - knowledge; ca - and; vijïänam - realized knowledge;

[p.427]
apürva-vaibhavam - unprecedented opulence; ya - who; bhäva-pürëaù - filled
with ecstasy; paramam - intense; samädaram - attention.
A person who lovingly hears with rapt attention this wonderful eightfold prayer to
Çré Çiva, can quickly gain Çré Hari-prema as well as transcendental knowledge, the
realization of that knowledge, and unprecedented devotional potency.

* * * * *
iti stuvantam * * * utsukäù / çivasya bhtyä vara-mälya-gandhaiù
vibhüñayäm äsur anuttamäìga / tato bahirveçmasu sanniviöhaù 22
iti - thus; stuvantam - praising; utsukäù - eager; çivasya - of Çiva; bhtyä - the
servants; vara-mälya-gandhaiù - with excellent fragrant garlands; vibhüñayäm
äsu - they decorated; anuttama-aìgam - the transcendental body; tata - then;
bahir-veçmasu - in outside dwellings; sanniviöhaù - situated.
After Lord Gaura thus praised Maheçvara, the servants of Çré Çiva very
enthusiastically ornamented Gauräìga's unparalled form with sublimely fragrant
flower-garlands, and the Lord then became settled nearby in some apartments. [*
words lost from original manuscript.]

bhaktärpitänna bubhuje tato 'sau / suptvä mudä tatra niçä ninäya
prätaù samutthäya sa këa-lélä / gäyan sukhenäpi babhüva pürëaù
23
bhakta-arpita - offered by the devotees; annam - foods; bubhuje - He enjoyed;
tata - then; asau - He; suptvä - after resting; mudä - in happiness; tatra - there;
niçäm - night; ninäya - passed; prätaù - early morning; samutthäya - rising; sa He; këa-léläm - Kåñëa's pastimes; gäyan - singing; sukhena - with joy; api - very;
babhüva - He became; pürëaù - full.

[p.428]
There Mahäprabhu ate some food offered by the bhaktas and passed the night in
that place, resting happily. Rising early in the morning, His heart again began
overflowing with delight as He sang songs describing the léläs of Çré Kåñëa.

paöhed ya ittha stavam ambujäka-kta puräreù puruottamasya
premänam evätra labheta nitya / sudurlabha yan muni-deva-vndaiù
24
paöhet - he may read; ya - who; ittham - this; stavam - prayer; ambuja-aka - the
lotus-eyed Lord; ktam - composed; pura-areù - about the enemy of the cities of
the demons, Çiva; purua-uttamasya - the transcendental person; premänam love; eva - indeed; atra - here; labheta - one can achieve; nityam - perpetual; sudurlabham - most rarely achieved; yat - which; muni-deva-vndaiù - by the
multitudes of sages and gods.
If one recites with devotion this glorification of the transcendental personality,
Lord Puräri, as composed by the lotus-eyed Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, one can
obtain here and now the eternally relishable pure love for Kåñëa, which is very
rarely achieved even by the hosts of sages and gods.

Thus ends the Eighth Sarga entitled "Darçana of Mahädeva," in the Third
Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Ninth Sarga
çré-çiva-nirmälya-bhojana-vyavasthänam
Gaura Hari Honors the Food Remnants of Çré Çiva

snätvä sa bindu-sarasi / dövä çré-bhuvaneçvaram

[p.429]
sukham äséno bhagavän / premänanda-pariplutaù 1
snätvä - after bathing; sa - He; bindu-sarasi - in the lake of drops; dövä - and
seeing; bhuvana-éçvaram - the Lord of the worlds; sukham - happily; äséna seated; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; prema-änanda - in the bliss of Kåñëalove; pariplutaù - totally immersed.
After bathing in Bindu-Sarovara and taking darçana of Çré Bhuvaneçvara, the allopulent Lord Çré Këa Caitanya sat contentedly, wholly immersed in the bliss of
prema.

tato bhuktvä varänna sa / bhaktaiù saìkalpita prabhuù
susväpa tatra sahöo / dhyäyan këa-padämbujam 2
tata - then; bhuktvä - eating; vara-annam - fine foods; sa - He; bhaktaiù - by the
devotees; saìkalpitam - prepared; prabhuù - the Master; susväpa - nicely rested;
tatra - there; sahöa - fully contented; dhyäyan - contemplating; këa-padaambujam - Kåñëa's lotus feet.
Mahäprabhu then ate choice foods prepared by the bhaktas, and afterwards as He
rested contentedly, He contemplated the lotus feet of Çré Kåñëa.

cintayäm äsa bhagavän / deva-devasya çülinaù
mahä-prasädo labhyeta / tadä bhujyämahe vayam 3
cintayäm äsa - He thought; bhagavän - the all-opulent; deva-devasya - of the
god of gods; çülinaù - who carries a trident; mahä-prasäda - great mercy (foods
tasted by the Lord) labhyeta - it may be obtained; tadä - then; bhujyämahe - we
could enjoy; vayam - we.
The illustrious Lord thought, "If somehow the mahä-prasäda of the tridentwielding god of gods could be obtained, then we could truly take pleasure."

[p.430]
iti cintayatas tasya / mahädeva-prasädakam
päëibhyä brähmaëaù kaçcid / ädäya sammukhe sthitaù 4
iti - thus; cintayata - thinking; tasya - His; mahädeva-prasädakam - a small
portion of the foods eaten by Çiva; päëibhyäm - with his hands; brähmaëaù - one
who knows what is spirit; kaçcit - a certain; ädäya - presenting; sammukhe - in
front; sthitaù - standing.
As He was reflecting thus, a certain brähmaëa came before Him, bearing in his
hands a small portion of Mahädeva's prasäda.

uväca ca mahädeva-prasäda ghyatäm iti
tat çrutvä sahasotthäya / ghétvä çirasä namaù 5
uväca - he said; ca - and; mahädeva-prasädam - the mercy of the great Lord;
ghyatäm - take; iti - thus; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; sahasä - at once; utthäya rising; ghétvä - took; çirasä - with the head; namaù - bowing.
He said, "Please accept this prasäda of Mahädeva." Hearing this, Lord Gaura at
once stood up and accepted the prasäda with bowed head.

mahä-prasäda saìghya / papau bhtyaiù sudhäm iva
çiva-priyo hi çré-këa / iti sandarçayan hariù 6
mahä-prasädam - great mercy; saìghya - taking; papau - He honored; bhtyaiù with His servants; sudhäm - nectar; iva - like; çiva-priya - He who holds dear
Lord Çiva; hi - indeed; çré-këa - the all-attractive; iti - thus; sandarçayan - clearly
demonstrated; hariù - Gaura Hari.
They all gathered together around the mahä-prasäda, and the Lord honored it with
His servants as though it were immortal nectar. Thus Gaura Hari showed how dear
Çiva is to Çré Kåñëa.

[p.431]
sukhäya punar eväsau / prätar utthäya sa-tvaraù
snätvä vai bindu-sarasi / çiva natvä yayau hariù 7
sukhäya - happily; puna - again; eva - indeed; asau - He; präta - early; utthäya rising; sa-tvaraù - quickly; snätvä - bathing; vai - indeed; bindu-sarasi - in the
lake of drops; çivam - Çiva; natvä - bowing to; yayau - He went; hariù - the
remover of sin.
Again Gaura Hari arose very early in grat happiness, and after bathing quickly in
Bindu-Sarovara, He bowed before Çré Çiva and then left on His way.

etan niçamya devasya / çiva-nirmmälya-bhakaëam
pratyuväca mahä-tejäù / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù 8
etat - this; niçamya - hearing; devasya - of the Lord; çiva-nirmälya - the
remnants of Çiva's food; bhakaëam - eating; pratyuväca - he responded; mahätejäù - very powerful; çré-dämodara-paëòitaù - the devoted scholar.
When the powerful brähmaëa Çré Dämodara Paëita heard that the Lord had eaten
the remnants of Çiva's food, He said:

näçnäti çiva-devasya / nirmmälya bhgu-çäpataù
katha jïätvä sa bhagavän / bubhuje tan narottamaù 9
na - not; açnäti - he eats; çiva-devasya - of Lord Çiva; nirmälyam - food
remnants; bhgu-çäpataù - because of the curse of Bhågu Muni; katham - how;
jïätvä - knowing; sa - He; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; bubhuje - He ate; tat that; nara-uttamaù - the transcendental person.
"One should not eat the remnants of Lord Çiva because Bhågu Muni has placed a
curse on those who worship him. Why then did the all-opulent transcendental Lord,
knowing this, eat that food?"

[p.432]
tat çrutvä präha viprendra / muräriù çrüyatäm iti
kathä çré-çiva-devasya / nirmmälyämta-bhakaëe 10
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; präha - he said; vipra-indram - exalted brähmaëa;
muräriù - Muräri Gupta; çrüyatäm - please hear; iti - thus; kathäm - the
explanation; çré-çiva-devasya - of Lord Çiva; nirmälya - food-remnants; amtabhakaëe - in eating the nectar.
Hearing this, Muräri replied to the noble vipra, "Hear from me the reason for
which the Lord ate those nectarean remnants of Çré Çiva-deva."

vastutas tu mahädevaù / çré-këasya çubhägame
ätithya vidadhe haräö / tena kiïca para çëu 11
vastuta - factually; tu - indeed; mahädevaù - the great lord; çré-këasya - of Çré
Kåñëa; çubha-ägame - at the auspicious coming; ätithyam - guesthood; vidadhe he accepted; haräö - out of joy; tena - of that; kiïca - somewhat; param - further;
çëu - please hear.
When Çré Kåñëa Caitanya made His auspicious arrival, Mahädeva joyously accepted
Him as an honored guest. Please hear somewhat further.

vaiëava-çreöha-buddhyä ye / püjayanti maheçvaram
tair ddatta ghëate so 'pi / tad anna pävana mahat 12
vaiëava-çreöha - the best devotee of Viñëu; buddhyä - with the consciousness;
ye - they; püjayanti - they worship; mahä-éçvaram - the great controller; tai - by
them; dattam - given; ghëate - he takes; sa api - that very person; tat annam that food; pävanam - purifing; mahat - great.
When bhaktas worship Mahädeva thinking of him as the best among vaiñëavas,
Mahçvara accepts that offering from them, and that food should be considered great
and pure prasäda.

[p.433]
çré-këa-këa-bhaktänä / bheda-buddhyä patanty adhaù
durvvairän çikayas täç ca / bhakta-rüpaù svaya hariù 13
çré-këa-këa-bhaktänäm - of Kåñëa and Kåñëa's devotees; bheda - of
differentiation; buddhyä - with a mentality; patanti - they fall; adhaù - down;
durvairän - inimical persons; çikayan - teaching; tän - them; ca - and; bhaktarüpaù - in the form of a devotee; svayam - in person; hariù - the remover of sin.
Those who in a sectarian spirit differentiate between Sré Kåñëa and his bhaktas
indeed fall down. Çré Hari personally advented in the form of a bhakta as Caitanya
Mahäprabhu in order to instruct such inimical persons.

äcaryyaty api deveço / hita-kt sarvva-dehinäm
nirmmälyäm ädareëaiva / ghétvä jagad-éçvaraù 14
äcaryati - He behaves; api - indeed; deva-éça - the Lord of godly beings; hita-kt enacting welfare; sarva-dehinäm - for all embodied beings; nirmälyäm - foodremnants; ädareëa - with reverence; eva - verily; ghétvä - taking; jagat-éçvaraù the Lord of the cosmos.
The Lord of all gods, who is the supreme controller of the cosmic manifestation,
certainly seeks to benefit all embodied beings. Thus, by His reverential acceptance
of Çré Çiva's food-remnants, He teaches them by His example.

janaiù sasthäpite liìge / bheda-buddhyä ca püjite
tatraiva çäpo viprasya / nahi syäd aikyataù kvacit 15
janaiù - by the people; sasthäpite - established; liìge - the sacred phallus; bhedabuddhyä - with a mentality of differentiation; ca - and; püjite - worshipped; tatra then; eva - certainly; çäpa - the curse; viprasya - of the learned brähmaëa; nahi certainly not; syät - it can be; aikyataù - in oneness; kvacit - sometimes.

[p.434]
Wherever the liìgam is established and worshipped with a conception that Çré Çiva
and Çré Hari have separate parties, there Bhgu's curse will act, because of this
offense of a dualistic concept.

hari-çaìkarayor aikya / svayambhü-liìga-sannidhau
abheda-buddhyä püjäyä / nahi çäpo bhavet kvacit 16
hari-çaìkarayo - of Hari and Çaìkara; aikyam - oneness; svayambhü - selfborn; liìga - form; sannidhau - in the place; abheda - of not differentiating;
buddhyä - because of the mentality; püjäyäm - in the worship; nahi - there is not;
çäpa - the curse; bhavet - can be; kvacit - at all.
Hari and Çaìkara have one interest. If in the presence of a Çiva liìgam someone
worships Them without a dualistic concept, the curse will not have effect.

tena taträdhikä prétir / hari-çaìkarayor bhavet
abhede 'tra svayambhau ca / püjä sarvvätiçäyiné 17
tena - for that reason; tatra - there; adhikä - more; préti - love; hari-çaìkarayo of Hari and Çaìkara; bhavet - it may be; abhede - in non-differentiation; atra here; svayambhau - for Lord Çiva; ca - and; püjä - worship; sarva - all; atiçäyiné increasing.
By people understand Their unity of interest, love will increase for both Hari and
Çaìkara, and worship for Them both will increase.

mahä-prasäda tatraiva / bhuktvä mokam aväpnuyät
mahä-rogät pramucyeta / sthira-sampattim äpnuyät 18
mahä-prasädam - great mercy; tatra - there; eva - certainly; bhuktvä - having
enjoyed; mokam - liberation; aväpnuyät - one may attain; mahä-rogät - from
great disease; pramucyeta - one is liberated; sthira-sampattim - undisturbed
prosperity; äpnuyät - one can get.

[p.435]
By tasting such mahä-prasäda one can attain liberation, be cured from terrible
diseases, and obtain undisturbed prosperity.

ye mohät tan na khädanti / te bhavanty aparädhinaù
harau çive ca niùçrékä / rogiëaç ca bhavanti te 19
ye - they; mohät - out of delusion; tat - that; na - not; khädanti - they eat; te they; bhavanti - become; aparädhinaù - offenders; harau - to Hari; çive - to Çiva;
ca - and; niùçrékä - devoid of opulence; rogiëa - diseased; ca - and; bhavanti they become; te - they.
Those who out of delusion do not eat such mahä-prasäda become offenders to both
Hari and Çiva. They become diseased and bereft of opulence.

vaiëavaiù püjito yatra / çré-çivaù paramädarät
anädi-liìgam äsädya / çré-këa-préti-hetave 20
tatraiva saçayo nästi / nirmmälya-grahaëe kvacit
bhaktir eva sadä vipra / çubha-dä sarvva-dehinäm 21
vaiëavaiù - by vaiñëavas; püjita - worshipped; yatra - where; çré-çivaù - of the
auspicious lord; parama-ädarät - with great reverence; anädi-liìgam - the
beginningless form; äsädya - to be attained; çré-këa-préti - love for Çré Kåñëa;
hetave - in order; tatra - in this matter; eva - surely; saçaya - doubt; na asti there is not; nirmälya-grahaëe - in accepting the remnants of Çiva; kvacit - at
any time; bhakti - devotion; eva - indeed; sadä - always; vipra - O learned
brähmaëa; çubha-dä - giving auspiciousness; sarva-dehinäm - for all embodied
beings.
Wherever the beginningless liìgam of Çré Çiva is worshipped with great respect by
vaiñëavas in order to develop love for Çré Kåñëa, there will be no doubt about
accepting the remnants of Çré Çiva's food. O vipra, such devotional service is verily

[p.436]
auspicious for all embodied beings.

Thus ends the Ninth Sarga entitled "Gaura Hari Honors the Food Remnants
of Çré Çiva," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Tenth Sarga
puruottama-darçanam
Vision of the Ultimate Person

punaù çëuva devasya / caitanyasya mahätmanaù
kathä manoharä puëyä / nütanämta-variëaù 1
punaù - again; çëuva - please hear; devasya - of the divine Lord; caitanyasya of the embodiment of the living force; mahä-ätmanaù - of the magnanimous;
kathäm - narration; mana-haräm - mind-stealing; puëyäm - purifying; nütana fresh; amta - of immortal nectar; variëaù - of He who causes a shower.
Now hear further the charming and pure history of the magnanimous Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu, whose association is like a refreshing shower of nectar.

tataù prayäto bhagavän mudänvito / nijair ajaù sädhu-janaikabandhuù
kapota-sampüjita-liìgam uttama / dövä praëamyäçu punar yayau
hariù 2
tataù - then; prayäta - set forth; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; mudä-anvita filled with joy; nijaiù - with His intimate followers; aja - the unborn; sädhu-jana saintly men; eka-bandhuù - the only friend; kapota - the Kapota liìgam;

[p.437]
sampüjita - well worshipped; liìgam - phallus; uttamam - transcendental; dövä seeing; praëamya - offering obeisances; äçu - at once; puna - again; yayau - went
away; hariù - destroyer of sin.
Thereafter the unborn all-opulent Personality of Godhead, Çré Hari, the sole friend
of the sädhu, went forth with a glad heart, accompanied by His associates. He saw
the transcendental Kapota-liìgam, He immediately offered obeisances and again
departed.

puëyän çivasyänyatamäç ca liìgän / vilokya hareëa naman punar
yayau
nadé mahä-véryyavaté sa bhärgavé / tasyä kta-snäna-vidhiù punar
yayau 3
puëyän - sanctified; çivasya - of Çiva; anyatamän - many other; ca - and; liìgän phallic forms; vilokya - glancing; hareëa - with joy; naman - bowing down; puna again; yayau - He went; nadém - river; mahä-véryavatém - a very swiftly flowing
river; sa - He; bhärgavém - named Bhargavé; tasyäm - in her; kta-snäna - took
bath; vidhiù - according to etiquette; puna - again; yayau - He went.
He also saw with gladness many other holy liìgams of Çiva, and after bowing down
before them, again proceeded on until He came to the swift flowing river named
Bhärgavé. After taking bath according to the vaiñëava precept, He continued
traveling onwards.

tato 'valokyäçu hareù su-mandira / sudhänulipta çarad-indu-suprabham
rathäìga-yukta pavanoddhutäçuka / vibhüaëa néla-girer
mahojjvalam 4
tata - then; avalokya - looking; äçu - suddenly; hareù - of Hari (Lord
Jagannätha); su-mandiram - beautiful temple; sudhä - nectar; anuliptam anointed; çarat-indu - autumn moon; su-prabham - sublime effulgence; ratha-

[p.438]
aìga-yuktam - with a chariot wheel (cakra); pavana - wind; uddhuta - blown;
açukam - flag; vibhüaëam - ornament; néla-gire - of the blue mountain; mahäujjvalam - very brilliant.
Suddenly Çré Caitanya glimpsed the beautiful temple of Çré jagannätha Hari. It
appeared like a blue mountain anointed with nectar, and was effulgent as the
autumn moon of Çarat. Crowned by a very dazzling cakra, its flag was unfurled and
blew in the breeze.

kailäsa-çìga muhur äkipac ca / käntyä samuccheatayä sudhämnä
prabhaïjanäkalpita-cela-hastair / ähüyamäna kamalekaëa tam 5
kailäsa-çìgam - the peak of Kailäça; muhu - repeatedly; äkipat - it humbled; ca and; käntyä - by its luster; samuccheatayä - by its height; sudhämnä - by its
influence; prabhaïjana - the wind; äkalpita - directed; cela - flags; hastai - by
the hands; ähüyamänam - calling; kamala-ékaëam - the lotus-eyed; tam - Him.
The luster, height, and influence of Jagannätha's transcendental abode mocked the
peak of Mount Kailäça. Using the temple's flags as his hands, the wind god
beckoned welcomingly the lotus-eyed Gauräìga .

papäta bhümau sahasä hatärir / harir gata-spandanam antarätmä
vilokya sarvve mumuhus tadéyäù / präëena hénäs tanavo yathäryäù
6
papäta - He fell; bhümau - on the earth; sahasä - suddenly; hata-ari - struck by
a foe; hari - the dispeller of evil; gata-spandanam - without motion; antara-ätmä internal Self; vilokya - observing; sarve - all; mumuhu - they became faint;
tadéyäù - His associates; präëena - lifeforce; hénä - without; tanava - bodies;
yathä - like; äryäù - the noble persons.
Then, having embraced Lord Jagannätha in His heart, suddenly Gaura Hari
tumbled to the earth as if struck by a foe, and becoming utterly motionless. When
His noble associates saw this, all of them became faint, like bodies without life.

[p.439]
tataù kaëenotthitam éçam utsukä / vilokya jéva parivavrur indriyäù
tathaivam ätmänam atad-vido janäù / svabhävatas tän bhagavän
athäbravét 7
tataù - then; kaëena - after a moment; utthitam - arising; éçam - the Lord;
utsukä - enlivened; vilokya - seeing; jévam - the living entity; parivavru - they
surrounded; indriyäù - the senses; tathä - so; evam - thus; ätmänam - His Self; atat-vida - unaware of that; janäù - the people; sva-bhävata - according with His
own nature; tän - them; bhagavän - the Lord; atha - then; abravét - He said.
A moment later, seeing that the Lord was arising, they all also became animate and
surrounded Him, just as the body's senses awaken by the connection of the soul.
Those persons were unaware of His true Self. Then, in His characteristic blissful
mood, the Lord addressed them:

bhavanta evätra harer ghopari / sthita mahä-néla-maëi-prabha
prabhum
bäla prapaçyantu tato na dtvä / döä tathocuù pratimä prabhor dvijäù
8
bhavanta - your honors; eva - indeed; atra - there; hare - of Hari; gha-upari above the abode; sthitam - situated; mahä - great; néla-maëi - blue jewel;
prabham - effulgent; prabhum - the Lord; bälam - boy; prapaçyantu - behold; tata then; na - not; dtvä - seeing; döä - seen; tathä - yes; ücuù - they said; pratimä - the
form; prabho - of the Lord; dvijäù - the brähmaëas.
"My dear devotees, Look and see! Just above the abode of Çré Hari! There our
Prabhu is shining magnificently like a great effulgent blue sapphire. Behold that
youth!" Although they were actually unable to see anything, those brähmaëas
replied, "Yes! Yes! We see the Lord's form."

mohaù punaù syäd iti çaìkyamänäs / tän abravét paçya harer gha-

[p.440]
dhvajam
älakya bäla punar äkipanta / vaktreëa pürëämta-raçmi-koöim 9
mohaù - delusion; punaù - again; syät - it may be; iti - thus; çaìkyamänä anxious; tän - them; abravét - He said; paçya - see!; hare - of Hari; gha-dhvajam the temple flag; älakya - visible; bälam - the youth; puna - more and more;
äkipantam - casting; vaktreëa - with His face; pürëa - full; amta - nectar; raçmikoöim - millions of rays.
They spoke thus because they were anxious, lest Gaura should again lose
consciousness. Then He said to them, "Look! That youth is visible just near the flag
of the temple of Çré Hari. Thousands of rays of pure nectar constantly emanate from
His face.

älola-raktäìguli-çoëa-padma- / talena mäm äkramati sma päëinä
dakeëa savyena ca veëu-randhra- / vinyasta-vakträìgulinätiçobhitaù 10
älola - moving; rakta - red; aìguli - fingers; çoëa-padma - red lotus; talena with the palm; mäm - Me; äkramati - He takes possession; sma - did; päëinä with the hands; dakeëa - with the right; savyena - with the left; ca - and; veëurandhra - flute-holes; vinyasta - placed; vaktra - mouth; aìgulinä - with the
finger; ati-çobhitaù - very attractive.
"The fingers of His left and right hands are placed upon the holes of the bamboo
flute, and they hold it to His mouth in a very attractive manner. Those deftly moving
fingers of His hands, whose palms resemble the red-lotus, have captivated My mind.

asau sudhä-raçmi-sahasra-käntiù / ko vä mano mohayati smitena
sa evam utkätitarä jagäma / druta druta-svarëa-ruciù sa-bhtyaiù 11
asau - He; sudhä - nectar; raçmi-sahasra - thousand rays; käntiù - effulgence;
ka vä - who indeed?; mana - mind; mohayati - illusion; smitena - by his smile; sa -

[p.441]
He; evam - thus; utka - eagerness; atitaräm - intense; jagäma - He went; drutam running; druta-svarëa - melted gold; ruciù - luster; sa-bhtyaiù - with His
servants.
"His sun-like effulgence radiates thousands of nectarean beams. Who is He, who
thus enchants My mind with His smile?" In this mood, Çré Gaura, whose luster
resembles molten gold, ran in a mood of intense eagerness for Kåñëa and was swiftly
pursued by His servitors.

präsädam älokya jagat-pater muhur / muhuù skhalan netraja-väridhärayä
çìgaù sumeror iva nirjharänvitas / tértha mkaëòor agamat sutasya
12
präsädam - palace; älokya - glancing; jagat-pate - the protector of the cosmos;
muhu muhuù - repeatedly; skhalan - stumbling; netra-ja-väri - tears; dhärayä - by
a torrent; çìgaù - peak; sumero - of Mount Meru; iva - like; nirjhara-anvita covered by waterfalls; tértham - holy place; mkaëòo - of Måkeëu; agamat - He
went; sutasya - of the son.
Again and again He glanced up at the palace of the universal Lord, at times
stumbling because of the streams of tears which gushed from His eyes. Thus, He
appeared like the peak of Mount Sumeru covered by waterfalls. On the way, He
visited the tértha of Märkeëòeyañ i, the son of Mkeëòu.

cakreëa cakre svayam ugra-cakriëä / tértha maheçäya sudéptimat
taöam
snätvä ca yasmin çiva-lokam äptäs / taträçu gatvä vidhivac cakära
13
snätvä tataù çaìkara-liìgam éçvaro / japann aghora praëanäma
daëòavat
stutvä maheça-stutibhiù su-maìgalair / jagäma yajïeça-mahälaya

[p.442]
prabhuù 14
cakreëa - with His disc; cakre - He made; svayam - by His own will; ugracakriëä - with His terrible disc; tértham - a holy place; mahä-éçäya - for Çiva;
sudéptimat - very brilliant; taöam - bank; snätvä - having bathed; ca - and; yasmin in which; çiva-lokam - the planet of Çiva; äptä - attained; tatra - there; äçu quicky; gatvä - going; vidhi-vat - according to the principles of çästra; cakära He made; snätvä - having bathed; tataù - then; çaìkara-liìgam - the sacred
phallus of the peace-maker; éçvara - the Supreme Lord; japan - meditating;
aghoram - not terrible (gentle); praëanäma - bowed down; daëòa-vat - like a
rod; stutvä - praising; mahä-éça-stutibhiù - with hymns of the great controller,
Çiva; su-maìgalai - very auspicious; jagäma - He went; yajïa-éça - the Lord of
sacrifice; mahä-älayam - the great abode; prabhuù - the Lord.
For the sake of Mahädeva, Lord Viñëu, used His terrible cakra to make a tértha in
that spot. Those who bathe there attain the planet of Çiva. Quickly Gaura Hari
entered that place and He took bath in accordance with the vaiñëava-vidhi. Then the
Supreme Lord meditated upon the liìgam of the gentle Çiva. He did japa of Çré Çivanäa and fallin before the liìgam like a rod, He offered praise to Maheça by chanting
auspicious verses composed in his glorification. Then our Prabhu departed for the
great abode of Jagannätha, the Lord of all sacrifice.
prahöa-romä nayanäbja-väribhiù / paréta-vakäù paramätma-cintayä

viveça deveça-gha mahotsava / nanäma dtvä jagatä pati prabhum 15
prahöa-romä - hairs erect; nayana - from His eyes; abja-väribhiù - with tears;
paréta - covered; vakäù - chest; parama-ätma-cintayä - because of thinking of the
Supreme Soul; viveça - He entered; deveça-gham - abode of the Lord of godly
men; mahä-utsavam - great festival; nanäma - He bowed down; dtvä - having
seen; jagatäm - of all sentient beings; patim - the master; prabhum - the Master.
As He entered the great festival within the temple of the God of gods, all the hairs
of His body thrilled due to great ecstasy, and His chest became covered with tears
because of He was thinking of the Lord who resides in the hearts of all. Then

[p.443]
beholding that Master of all worlds, our Prabhu bowed down.
papäta bhümau punar eva daëòavan / naman muhuù prema-bharäkulänanaù

tataù kaëän muöi-kara vibhävayan / jagat-pati so 'tiruroda vihvalaù
16
papäta - He fell; bhümau - to the earth; puna - again; eva - indeed; daëòa-vat like a rod; naman - bowing; muhuù - again; prema-bhara - holding His love;
äkulä - preoccupied; ananaù - face; tataù - then; kaëät - after a moment; muöikaram - hands clenched; vibhävayan - showing ecstacy; jagat-patim - the master
of the universe; sa - He; ati-ruroda - He wept loudly; vihvalaù - overwhelmed.
Falling again like a rod to the ground, He then arose and fell again and again. His
face showed the struggle of holding back the symptoms of prema, but after a
moment He displayed His overwhelming ecstatic feelings for the Lord of the
universe. His fists clenched and He wept loudly.

dövä tam ittha puruottamo hariù / prasäryya päëi kamaläìgakomalam
adarçayad rakta-tala tato mudä / caitanya-devo håito jahäsa 17
dövä - seeing; tam - Him; ittham - thus; puruottama - the ultimate Personality;
hariù - the remover of sin; prasärya - spread; päëim - His hand; kamala - lotus;
aìga - limb; komalam - soft; adarçayat - He showed; rakta-talam - reddish palm;
tata - then; mudä - in bliss; caitanya-deva - Caitanya-deva; håita - thrilled; jahäsa laughed.
Seeing Him thus affected, Çré Puruñottama Hari extended His soft lotus hand,
revealing His ruddy palm, and Caitanya-deva laughed with gladness.

uväca caiva karuëämbudhe tva / praséda deveça maheça-vandita
punar na dövä kara-pallaväìguli / ruroda tasmin dvi-guëa sa
vihvalaù 18

[p.444]
uväca - He said; ca - and; evam - thus; karuëä-ambudhe - O ocean of mercy;
tvam - You; praséda - have mercy; deva-éça - Lord of the demigods; mahä-éçavandita - who are praised by Çiva; puna - again; na - not; dövä - seeing; kara - the
hand; pallava-aìgulém - with its fingers like blossoms; ruroda - He wept; tasmin there; dvi-guëam - with twice the strength; sa - He; vihvalaù - overwhelmed.
He said, "O ocean of mercy! God of gods, who are offered prayers by Maheça!
Please show Your mercy to Me!" Then being unable to see again the blossom-like
fingers of Lord Jagannätha's hand, Gaura felt begrieved and wept with redoubled
strength.

punaç ca döväti-mahotsavänvito / haräçru-dhäräpluta-deha-yaöiù 19
puna - again; ca - and; dövä - seeing; ati-mahä-utsava-anvita - filled with great
festivity; hara-açru - tears of joy; dhärä - flood; äpluta - immersed; deha-yaöiù slender body.
Again seeing Jagannätha's hand, Gaura became filled with immense exultation, and
His slender body became flooded by streams formed of tears of joy.

eva tayor udbhaöa-ceöita janäù / çëvanti gäyanti para vrajanti te
pada muräreù paramärtha-darçino / na yatra bhüyaù patana kvacid
bhavet 20
evam - thus; tayo - of those two; udbhaöa - magnanimous; ceöitam - behavior;
janäù - people; çëvanti - they hear; gäyanti - sing; param - Supreme; vrajanti they go; te - they; padam - abode; mura-areù - of the enemy of the Murä demon;
parama-artha - the ultimate goal; darçina - seers; na - not; yatra - where; bhüyaù again; patanam - falling; kvacit - ever; bhavet - it may be.
Those who hear and sing of the exalted and magnanimous behavior of Jagannätha
Svämé and Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu can see the ultimate goal of life and thus enter
the supreme abode of Muräri, wherefrom one never again falls.

[p.445]
Thus ends the Tenth Sarga entitled "Vision of the Ultimate Person," in the
Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eleventh Sarga
çré-mahä-prasäda-mahimä
The Glories of Mahä-Prasäda

tat çrutvä präha viprendraù / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù
katha döo bhagavatä / puruottama éçvaraù 1
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; präha - he said; vipra-indraù - best of learned
brähmaëas; çré-dämodara-paëòitaù - the scholar Çré Dämodara; katham - how?;
döa - seen; bhagavatä - by the Lord; puruottama - the ultimate person; éçvaraù the supreme controller.
After hearing all this, the learned vipra Çré Dämodara Paëita further inquired,
"How did the blessed Lord Gaura again see the Supreme Lord Puruñottama-deva?

dtaù kena ki akarot / svayam eva janärddanaù
tat çrutvä präha sa guptas / tuöo vaidyo kathä çubhäm 2
dtaù - seen; kena - how?; kim - what?; akarot - He did; svayam - by His sweet
will; eva - indeed; jana-ardanaù - thriller of the hearts of men; tat - that; çrutvä hearing; präha - he said; sa - he; gupta - Muräri Gupta; tuöa - pleased; vaidya physician; kathäm - narration; çubhäm - sublime.
"By whose assistance did He see Jagannätha, and what did Çré Caitanya Janärdana

[p.446]
then do?" Hearing this, the physician Muräri Gupta was satisfied and continued
narrating that sublime history.

çëuvävahita brahman / divyä trai-lokya-pävaném
kathä çré-jagad-éçasya / darçanänanda-sambhaväm 3
çëuva - hear; avahitam - attentively; brahman - O brähmaëa; divyäm - divine;
trai-lokya-pävaném - purifying the three worlds; kathäm - history; çré-jagatéçasya - of the Lord of all sentient beings; darçana-änanda-sambhaväm - born of
the bliss of seeing.
O brähmaëa, listen attentively to this divine story that purifies the three worlds. It
arises from the joy Mahäprabhu took in looking upon the Master of all sentient
beings.

gatvädau väsudevasya / särvvabhaumasya veçmani
sa-tvara sa samutthäya / nanäma daëòavat su-dhéù 4
gatvä - gone; ädau - first; väsudevasya särvabhaumasya - of Väsudeva
Särvabhauma; veçmani - in the house; sa-tvaram - quickly; sa - he; samutthäya arising; nanäma - he bowed down; daëòa-vat - like a rod; su-dhéù - very wise.
When Çré Gauräìga first arrived in Puruñottama Kñetra, He went to the house of
Väsudeva Särvabhauma. At once that intelligent scholar rose to greet Him and fell
before Him offering obeisances.

dövä ta präha bhagavän / sa-gadgada-girä hariù
katha drakyämi deveça / jagannätha sanätanam 5
dövä - seeing; tam - him; präha - He said; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sagadgada - choked-up; girä - with words; hariù - the remover of sin; katham how?; drakyämi - I shall see; deva-éçam - the Lord of the godly; jagat-nätham the Lord of the universe; sanätanam - eternal.

[p.447]
Seeing Särvabhauma, Çré Hari addressed him in a faltering voice, "Kindly tell Me how may I see My eternal Lord of lords, Çré Jagannätha?"

iti çrutvä vacas tasya / särvvabhaumo mahä-yaçäù
prakäçi-nayanäbjena / tad-vapuù samalokayat 6
iti - thus; çrutvä - hearing; vaca - words; tasya - His; särvabhauma - the court
scholar of the king of Orissa; mahä-yaçäù - greatly renowned; prakäçi-nayanaabjena - with eyes like blooming lotuses; tat-vapuù - His body; samalokayat - he
observed.
Särvabhauma heard the Lord's request, but as that renowned scholar observed
intently at Gauräìga's form, His lotus eyes opened wide with astonishment.

su-tapta-käïcanäbhäsa / meru-çìgam iväparam
räkä-sudhäkaräkära-mukha jalaja-locanam 7
su-tapta-käïcana - beautiful molten gold; äbhäsam - luster; meru-çìgam - the
peak of Meru; iva - like; aparam - another; räkä-sudhä-kara - night-nectarmaker (the moon); äkära - appearance; mukham - face; jalaja-locanam - lotus
eyes.
Gauräìga's complexion had the sublime effulgence of molten gold, like another
Mount Meru. His face appeared like the moon as it generates of nectar throughout
the night, and His eyes resembled lotus flowers.

su-nasa kambu-kaëöhäòhya / mahoraska mahä-bhujam
bandhüka-mukurärakta-danta-cchada-manoharam 8
su-nasam - fine nose; kambu-kaëöha - conch-neck; äòhyam - enriched; mahäuraskam - a broad chest; mahä-bhujam - great arms; bandhüka - a crimson
flower; mukura - blossoming; arakta - reddish; danta-chada - teeth-hiders (lips);

[p.448]
mana-haram - mind-stealing.
His nose was aristocratic, and His neck resembled a conch. His chest was broad
and His arms very long. His charming crimson lips resembled budding bandhüka
flowers.

kundäbha-dantam atyanta-candra-raçmi-jita-smitam
äjänulambita-bhuja / vilasat-päda-paìkajam 9
kunda-äbha - hue of jasmine; dantam - teeth; atyanta - unlimited; candra-raçmi
- rays of the moon; jita - defeated; smitam - smiling; ä-jänu-lambita - hanging to
His knees; bhujam - arms; vilasat - shining; päda-paìkajam - lotus feet.
His teeth were white like jasmine buds, and His smile defeated the radiance of
limitless moons. His arms extended to His knees, and His lotus feet shone brightly.

këa-premojjvala çaçvat / pulakäncita-vigraham
kürmonnata-pada-dvandva /ò tvädau vismito 'bhavat 10
këa-prema-ujjvalam - blazing love of Kåñëa; çaçvat - forever; pulaka-aïcita hairs standing erect; vigraham - body; kürma-unnata - humped like the shells of
tortoises; pada-dvandvam - pair of feet; òtvä - seeing; ädau - at first; vismita astonished; abhavat - he became.
In His heart, Kåñëa-prema forever brightly blazed. The hairs of His body thrilled
out of rapture, and the tops of His feet resembled the curved shells of tortoises.
Särvabhauma was astonished to see all this, and thought:

kim asau purua-vyäghro / mahä-purua-lakaëaù
avatérna iväbhäti / vaikuëthäd deva-rüpa-dhk 11
kim - what?; asau - He; purua-vyäghra - tiger among men; mahä-purua - great
personality; lakaëaù - having symptoms; avatérna - descended; iva - like; äbhäti -

[p.449]
He appears; vaikuëthät - from the spiritual world; deva-rüpa-dhk - He accepts a
divine form.
"Who is this illustrious male, with every sign of a great personality? It appears that
He has descended from Vaikuëöha to play a role of divine pastimes.

kim väsau sac-cid-änanda-rüpavän rasa-mürttimän
kim väsau sarvva-jévänä / hita-kd éçvaraù svayam 12
kim vä - whether?; asau - He; sat-cit-änanda - of eternity, knowledge and bliss;
rüpavän - person having a form; rasa-mürtimän - the form of mellows; kim vä whether?; asau - He; sarva-jévänäm - of all living beings; hita-kt - benefactor;
éçvaraù - Supreme Lord; svayam - in Person.
"Can He possibly be the original primeval personality, the resevoir of eternity,
bliss and knowledge, the personified form of all rasa? Could He be the benefactor of
all living beings, the original Personality of Godhead, the I~çvara Himself?"

iti saïcintya manasä / so 'nuja präha çuddha-dhéù
gaccha tvam çré-yutenädya / caitanyena mahätmanä 13
pura bhagavataù çéghra / yathäsau puruottamam
paçyaty ananta-puruam / anäyäsena tat kuru 14
iti - thus; saïcintya - considering; manasä - in his mind; sa - he; anujam - to
the younger brother; präha - he said; çuddha-dhéù - of pure intelligence; gaccha go; tvam - you; çré-yutena - blessed by Lakñmé; adya - now; caitanyena - with
Caitanya; mahätmanä - with the magnanimous; puram - temple; bhagavataù - of
the Lord; çéghra - quickly; yathä - so; asau - He; purua-uttamam - the
transcendental Person; paçyati - He sees; ananta-puruam - unlimited Person;
anäyäsena - without difficulty; tat - that; kuru - do.
Thinking in this way, the wise Särvabhauma told his younger brother, "Quickly go

[p.450]
with this blessed soul, Çré Caitanya, to the temple of the Lord. Let Him behold
without hindrance the ultimate Supreme Person, who expands into limitless forms,
and possesses sublime attributes."

tat çrutvä särvvabhaumasya / vacanämtam adbhutam
yayau tasyänujo dhémän / caitanyena sahäyavän 15
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; särvabhaumasya - of Särvabhauma; vacana-amtam nectarean instructions; adbhutam - wonderful; yayau - he went; tasya - his;
anuja - younger brother; dhémän - intelligent; caitanyena - with Caitanya;
sahäyavän - in company.
Hearing these wonderful nectarean words uttered by Çré Särvabhauma, his
intelligent younger brother departed in the company of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu.

tena särddha sa bhagavän / gatvä çré-hari-mandiram
dadarça puëòarékäka / puruottamam éçvaram 16
tena - with him; särdham - accompanied; sa - He; bhagavän - the all-opulent
Lord; gatvä - going; çré-hari-mandiram - the temple of Hari; dadarça - He saw;
puëòaréka-akam - lotus-eyed; purua-uttamam - transcendental Person; éçvaram Supreme Person.
The all-opulent Lord went with him to the mandira of Çré Hari, and there He saw
the transcendental Personality of Godhead, Puruñottama Jagannätha, with His eyes
resembling blue lotuses.

dövollasad-vihvalitäìga-yaöiù / premäçru-väri-jhara-pürita-pénavakäù
kampodgata-pracura-väri-yutendu-vaktro / hemädri-çìga iva vätaktaù papäta 17
dövä - having seen; ullasat - brightly shining; vihvalita - overwhelmed; aìga-

[p.451]
yaöiù - slender body; prema - love; açru - tears; väri-jhara - waterfall; pürita covered; péna-vakäù - broad chest; kampa - trembled; udgata - thrown out;
pracura - profuse; väri - water; yuta - with; indu - moon; vaktra - face; hema-adri golden mountain; çìga - peak; iva - like; väta-ktaù - struck by a hurricane;
papäta - He fell.
Upon seeing Him, the slender form of Gauräìga, which resembled a golden
mountain peak, became entranced with blossoming mellows. Tears of love formed
waterfalls which inundated His effulgent moon-like face and flooded His broad
chest. Then trembling profusely, He tumbled to the ground as if struck by a
hurricane.

bhümau mumoha bhagavän kta-muöi-hasto / visrasta-vastra-rasano
vivaça viditvä
ta te dvijäù sapadi bähu-yugena dhtvä / ktväìkato bhagavataù
purato vininyuù 18
bhümau - on the earth; mumoha - He fainted; bhagavän - the Lord; kta-muöihasta - His hands clenched; visrasta-vastra - scattered garments; rasana - belt;
vivaçam - unconscious; viditvä - knowing; tam - Him; te - they; dvijäù - the
brähmaëas; sapadi - at once; bähu-yugena - His two arms; dhtvä - held; ktvä made; aìkata - from the lap; bhagavataù - of the Lord; purata - from the temple;
nininyuù - they took.
Thus Bhagavän Çré Caitanya fainted upon the earth. His hands were clenched and
His garments and belt were scattered. Realizing that the Lord was oblivious to
externals, the brähmaëa-priests at once lifted Him by His two arms and took Him
from the temple of Jagannätha.

çré-särvvabhauma-vara-veçmani labdha-saìjïaù / saìkérttana narahareù punar eva cakre
ntya ca tatra pulakävali-püritäìgo / gäìgeya-gaura-vapuñä
puruädhiräjaù 19

[p.452]
çré-särvabhauma - of Särvabhauma; vara-veçmani - in the fine house; labdhasaìjïaù - regained consciousness; saìkértanam - congregational chanting; narahareù - of the human-like Hari; puna - again; eva - indeed; cakre - He made;
ntyam - dancing; ca - and; tatra - there; pulaka-ävali - rows of erect hairs; püritaaìga - body covered; gäìgeya - golden, the origin of the Gaìgä, who delights in
the Gaìgä waters; gaura-vapuñä - by the body of Gaura; purua-adhiräjaù - the
original lord of all men.
Çré Gauräìga regained external consciousness in the fine house of Särvabhauma,
and at once performed saìkértana of Narahari. Then the emperor of all enjoyers,
His golden body became covered with pulakas, began to dance.

bhikä cakära bhagavän sa nijena särdha / bhaktena dattam amta sumahä-prasädam
anna rasäyana-vara bhava-rogiëä yad / devendra-durlabhatara
puruottamasya 20
bhikäm - alms; cakära - He took; bhagavän - the Lord; sa - He; nijena intimate; särdham - together; bhaktena - by His devotee; dattam - given; amtam nectar; su-mahä-prasädam - excellent foods tasted by the Lord; annam - foods;
rasa-äyana - reservoir of flavors, elixir; varam - best; bhava-rogiëäm - for those
afflicted by the disease of birth and death; yat - which; deva-indra - the best of
the gods; durlabhataram - most rare; purua-uttamasya - of the Supreme Person,
Jagannätha Svämé.
Then one of Kåñëa Caitanya's bhaktas brought Him bhikñä in the form of immortal
and nectarean mahä-prasäda of Jagannätha Svämé. That food is the reservoir of all
divine flavors, and it acts as a superexcellent medicine to cure souls afflicted by
bhava-roga, the disease of birth and death. It is rarely obtained even by the best of
gods.

bhuktvä yad annam akhila vjina jahäti / dharmärtha-kämam amta

[p.453]
ca tathä mahattvam
präpnoti bäliça-jano yadi naiva bhuìkte / gaccheta çükara-gati sa ca
dharma-hénaù 21
bhuktvä - having eaten; yat - which; annam - food; akhilam - all; vjinam calamity; jahäti - he gives up; dharma-artha-kämam - religiosity, economic
development and sense enjoyment; amtam - immortality; ca - and; tathä - also;
mahattvam - qualities of great souls; präpnoti - he obtains; bäliça-jana - a foolish
person; yadi - if; na - not; eva - indeed; bhuìkte - he enjoys; gaccheta - he attains;
çükara-gatim - birth of a hog; sa - he; ca - and; dharma-hénaù - bereft of virtue.
He who eats that food with devotion entirely gives up the fruitless endeavor to
enjoy this calamitous material existence. Attaining the qualities of a great soul, he
receives the benefits of religiosity, economic development, sense gratification, and
immortality. But that foolish person, devoid of virtue, who will not eat it, attains the
birth of a hog.

caitanya-deva iha yad vivaço vibhüya / bhuìkte çivo 'pi yadi tan
nahi khädatéha
duräd athägatam iti çvapacena väpi / spöa vilokya bata çükaratäm
upaiti 22
caitanya-deva - Lord Caitanya; iha - in this instance; yat - which; vivaça enthusiastic; vibhüya - demonstrating; bhuìkte - He ate; çiva - auspicious; api although; yadi - if; tat - that; nahi - surely not; khädati - he eats; iha - in this life;
durät - from afar; atha - or; ägatam - come; iti - thus; çva-pacena - by a dog-eater;
vä api - or even; spöam - touched; vilokya - seeing; bata - indeed; çükaratäm - the
state of a hog; upaiti - he attains.
Caitanya-deva's enthusiastic eating of Jagannätha-prasäda was to show to the world
that such food is always auspicious. One who has received this human life but who
refuses to eat it because it has come from afar, or has been looked at or even
touched by a dog-eater, will certainly take birth as a hog.

[p.454]
Thus ends the Eleventh Sarga entitled "The Glories of Mahä-Prasäda," in the
Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Twelfth Sarga
särvvabhauma-anugrahaù
Lord Gauräìga Shows Mercy to Särvabhauma

bhuktvä prasäda n-hareù sva-mandira / praviçya säya bhagavän
dadarça
dhüpena sandhüpitam abja-locana / dépair anekair bahu-mälyakena
1
bhuktvä - having eaten; prasädam - the mercy; n-hareù - of the human-like
Lord; sva-mandiram - His temple; praviçya - entering; säyam - at dusk; bhagavän the Lord; dadarça - He saw; dhüpena - with lamps; sandhüpitam - lighted; abjalocanam - the lotus-eyed one; dépai - with lamps; anekai - many; bahu-mälyakena
- with many garlands.
After eating Çré Nåhari's prasäda, at dusk Mahäprabhu again entered the Çré
Mandira. There saw the lotus-eyed Lord Jagannätha offered many fragrant oils,
incense, ghee lamps and flower-garlands.

vibhüita pürëa-niçädhinätha- / sahasra-kalpa nava-megha-varëam
nanäma bhümau puruottamäkhya / vikäçi-netreëa papau muhuç ca
2
vibhüitam - ornamented; pürëa - full; niça-adhinätha - emperor of the night;

[p.455]
sahasra-kalpam - a thousand times; nava-megha - a new cloud; varëam - the
color; nanäma - He bowed; bhümau - on the earth; purua-uttama - the Ultimate
Person; äkhyam - named; vikäçi-netreëa - with blossoming eyes; papau - He
drank; muhu - again; ca - and.
Delightfully decorated with splendid ornaments, Jagannätha Svämé appeared a
thousand times more luminous than the emperor of the night. The Lord's
complexion was swarthy, like the hue of a newly-formed torrential thundercloud. Bowing before Him to the ground, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya again, again and
yet again drank the vision of Çré Puruñottama-deva through His blossoming
eyes.

änanda-räçau parimagna-citto / neträmbu-dhäräti-sudhauta-vakäù
romäïca-saïcära-vibhüitäìgo / hemädri-çìgopama-gaura-dehaù 3
änanda-räçau - in heaps of bliss; parimagna-citta - heart fully immersed; netraambu - tears; dhära - currents; ati-su-dhauta - very nicely washed; vakäù - chest;
roma-aïca - hairs erect; saïcära - impelling; vibhüita - ornamented; aìga - body;
hema-adri - of a golden mountain; çìga - peak; upama - like; gaura-dehaù golden body.
Gaura's heart was immersed in a shoreless sea of änanda, and His chest became
bathed by the flood of tears from that sea. His body was ornamented by jubilant
thrilling hair-follicles, and His golden body appeared like the peak of a golden
mountain.

raräja räjeva sa bhü-suräëä / prabhuù prasünävali-vöi-kälam
taträvasat çré-puruottama punar / natvä jagämäçramam äçrameçaù
4
raräja - He shone; räjä - a king; iva - like; sa - He; bhü-suräëäm - of the
brähmaëas; prabhuù - the Master; prasüna-ävali-vöi - flower showers; kälam - the
time; tatra - there; avasat - He stayed; çré-purua-uttamam - the transcendent

[p.456]
Person; puna - again; natvä - having bowed; jagäma - He went; äçramam - place
for spiritual cultivation; äçrama-éçaù - Lord of spiritual cultivation.
Shining as the sovereign of the twice-born, Prabhu remained there while the
bhaktas offered puñpäïjali to Puruñottamadeva. Then, again offering prostrated
obeisances before Him, that same original creator of the system of äçramas, returned
to His äçrama.

gatvä niçäyä punar eva kértti / jagau harer adbhuta-vikramasya
sa vihvalaù prema-vibhinna-dhairyyo / luöhan kitau veda na cäpara
kiyat 5
gatvä - having gone; niçäyäm - at night; puna - again; eva - assuredly; kértim fame; jagau - He sang; hare - of Hari; adbhuta-vikramasya - of wonderful
prowess; sa - He; vihvalaù - overwhelmed; prema-vibhinna-dhairya composure interrupted by feelings of love; luöhan - rolling; kitau - on the earth;
veda - He knew; na - not; ca - and; aparam - more; kiyat - so much.
After Çré Caitanya returned to the house of Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, throughout
the nightHe sang the fame of Çré Hari, the possessor of astonishing abilities, and
again He became overwhelmed and lost all composure due to Hari-prema, and so
absorbed He rolled to and fro upon the earth, knowing nothing more than that
prema.

eva mahätmä katicid dinäni / taträvasat sädhubhir arcitäìghriù
açikayat sajjanam abja-netro / mudä mano-jïair vvacanämtaiç ca 6
evam - thus; mahä-ätmä - the magnanimous soul; katicit - a few; dinäni - days;
tatra - there; avasat - He dwelt; sädhubhi - with the saints; arcita - worshipped;
aìghriù - feet; açikayat - He taught; sajjanam - that godly man; abja-netra - lotuseyed; mudä - gladly; mano-jïai - with charming; vacana-amtai - with words of
nectar; ca - indeed.
The Supreme Soul dwelt there a few days, in this manner and His feet were

[p.457]
worshipped by godly people. The lotus-eyed Lord gladly gave instruction to them
with charming and nectarean words.

tasmin kadäcit parimohitätmä / çré-särvvabhaumaù prabhum
äyäyau saù
caitanya-deva manuja viditvä / babhäa éan nija-loka-madhye 7
tasmin - in that place; kadäcit - once; parimohita-ätmä - a soul fully illusioned;
çré-särvabhaumaù - the expansion of Båhaspati; prabhum - the Master; äyäyau he went; saù - He; caitanya-devam - Lord Caitanya; manujam - a man; viditvä considering; babhäe - he said; éat - somewhat; nija-loka-madhye - in the midst of
his own people.
Once while Çré Caitanya-deva was residing in that place, Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya,
who was a soul fully covered by illusion, came to the place where Mahäprabhu was
staying. Considering an Him an ordinary man, he then spoke a few words
surrounded by his own people.

sa eva moho 'pi kpätirekaù / çré-särvvabhaumäya janärddanasya
yad yat karoty eva hariù svaya prabhus / tad eva satya jagato hitäya
8
sa - he; moha - delusion; api - verily; kpä-atireka - exceeding in mercy; çrésärvabhaumäya - unto Särvabhauma; janärdanasya - of Janärdana; yat yat whatever; karoti - He does; eva - certainly; hariù - the remover of sin; svayam of His own desire; prabhu - the Master; tat - that; eva - surely; satyam - truly;
jagata - of the material worlds; hitäya - for the benefit.
Although Särvabhauma was very deluded, Gaura Janärdana is very merciful. Surely
He performs each and every one of His actions solely by His sweet desire to benefit
the people of the world.

aya mahä-vaça-samudbhavaù pumän / su-paëòitaù prauòha-väyäù

[p.458]
katha caret
sannyäsa-dharma tad amu dvija punaù / kåtvätma-vedäntam
açikyämahe 9
ayam - this; mahä-vaça - great dynasty; samudbhavaù - born of; pumän - man;
su-paëòitaù - highly learned; prauòha-väyäù - in full youth; katham - how?; caret
- He may execute; sannyäsa-dharmam - the practice of renunciation; tat - that;
amum - this; dvijam - brähmaëa; punaù - again; kåtvä - having done; ätmavedäntam - the conclusion of Vedic knowledge concerning the soul; açikyämahe we may instruct.
Särvabhauma said, "This man is born of a great family, and He is an excellent
scholar. But since He is in the flower of youth, how can He successfully execute the
practices of sannyäsa? Fr this we should again give Him a second birth and teach
Him the knowledge of Vedänta concerning the ätmä."

jïätvä haris tat punar äha sa-smito / yajïopavéta punar eva me
bhavet
pupäni pügäny anugandhavanti / mälyäni vipräya dadämy aha tadä
10
jïätvä - apprised; hari - the dispeller of sin; tat - that; puna - further; äha - He
said; sa-smita - with a smile; yajïa-upavétam - the sacrificial thread; puna - again;
eva - indeed; me - of Me; bhavet - let it be; pupäni - flowers; pügäni - heaps;
anugandhavanti - fragrant; mälyäni - garlands; vipräya - to the learned
brähmaëa; dadämi - I am giving; aha - I; tadä - then.
Hearing this, Çré Hari said with a smile, "Yes, let Me again receive the sacred
thread, and I shall offer heaps of fragrant flowers and garlands to this vipra."

ity äha gatvä vacana muräreù / çré-särvvabhaumäya jano viditvä
bhétyä na kiïcit punar evam üce / vréòäparo 'bhüt sa tu
sambhrameëa 11

[p.459]
iti - thus; äha - He said; gatvä - leaving; vacanam - the words; mura-areù - of
the enemy of Murä, Çré Caitanya; çré-särvabhaumäya - to Çré Särvabhauma; jana the people; viditvä - understanding; bhétyä - out of fear; na kiïcit - nothing; puna
- more; evam - thus; üce - he said; vréòä-apara - overcome by shyness; abhüt - he
was; sa - they; tu - indeed; sambhrameëa - out of awe.
So saying, He left that spot. Some persons told Särvabhauma BHaööäcärya about
MuräriCaitanya's response to his words, yet Särvabhauma felt shy due to respect for
the Lord and said nothing more.

athäparähne dvija-vnda-sannidhau / sa särvvabhaumasya puro
mahäprabhuù
uväca vedänta-nigüham artha / vaco muräreç caraëämbujäçrayam
12
atha - then; aparähne - in the afternoon; dvija-vnda-sannidhau - in the presence
of a host of brähmaëas; sa - He; särvabhaumasya pura - before Särvabhauma;
mahä-prabhuù - the great Master; uväca - spoke; vedänta - of Vedänta; nigüham confidential; artha - meaning; vaca - statements; muräre - of Muräri; caraëaambuja - lotus feet; äçrayam - shelter.
Then in the afternoon, in the presence of the Bhaööäcärya and a host of brähmaëas,
Mahäprabhu explained how the confidential purport of the Vedänta-sütras points to
the shelter of Muräri's lotus feet.

vedänta-siddhäntam ida viditvä / gata purä yat tad ala sa matvä
caitanya-pädäbja-yuge mahätmä / sa vismayotphulla-manäù papäta
13
vedänta - the study of Vedänta-ñütra; siddha-antam - the perfect culmination;
idam - this; viditvä - comprehending; gatam - gone; purä - before; yat - whatever;
tat - that; alam - enough; sa - he; matvä - considering; caitanya-päda-abja-yuge -

[p.460]
at the pair of lotus feet of Caitanya; mahä-ätmä - the great soul; sa - he; vismaya amazed; utphulla-manäù - heart blooming; papäta - he fell.
At this time Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya could comprehend that the principle taught
by Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu was the perfectional conclusion of Vedänta study.
Thus he considered all he had previously thought knowledge to be ignorance, and
he therefore discarded it. That great soul fell at Çré Caitanya's lotus feet, his heart
blossoming in wonder.

vedänurakto bhagavän bhavän prabhur / loko na jänäti ca kadäcid
aëv api
sammohitätmä tava mäyayä prabho / loke padäbja ca taväham
agrataù 14
veda - by the Vedic hymns; anurakta - beloved, praised; bhagavän - all-opulent
Lord; bhavän - Your honor; prabhu - the Master; loka - the world; na - not; jänäti
- it knows; ca - but; kadäcit - at all; aëu api - even in the least; sammohita-ätmä a bewildered soul; tava - Your; mäyayä - by the illusory energy, by the grace;
prabho - O Master; loke - in this world; pada-abjam - lotus feet; ca - and; tava Your; aham - I; agrataù - in front.
"O all-opulent Personality of Godhead," Särvabhauma prayed, "Your Lordship is
the beloved Person who is gloried in the Vedic hymns. The people of the world
cannot understand You in the least. O Prabhu, I am also a soul bewildered by Your
illusory potency, but in this life, by Your grace, I have come in the presence of Your
lotus feet.

purä pthivyä vasudeva-gehe / 'vatéryya kasädi-mahäsuräëäm
ktvä vadha tva pratipädya dhäma / bhüdeva-gehe punar äviräsét 15
purä - before; pthivyäm - on the earth; vasudeva-gehe - in the house of
Vasudeva; avatérya - descending; kasa-ädi - headed by Kasa; mahä-asuräëäm - of
the great demons; ktvä - performed; vadham - killing; tvam - You; pratipädya manifesting; dhämam - Your abode; bhü-deva-gehe - in the home of a brähmaëa;

[p.461]
puna - again; äviräsét - He appeared.
"In ancient times, You descended to earth in the home of Vasudeva and slew many
great demons headed by Kasa. Now, again manifesting Your transcendental abode,
You have appeared in the home of a brähmaëa.

svakéya-mädhuryya-viläsa-vaibhavam / äsvädayas tva sva-jana
sukhäya ca
ktävatäro jagataù çiväya / mä pähi déna karuëämtäbdhe 16
svakéya - married; mädhurya - unmarried; viläsa - pleasure-pastimes;
vaibhavam - magnificence; äsvädayan - causing to relish; tvam - You; sva-janam Your devotees; sukhäya - for the happiness; ca - and; kta-avatära - made
descent; jagataù - of the worlds; çiväya - for the welfare; mäm - me; pähi protect; dénam - wretched; karuëä-amta - nectarean mercy; abdhe - O ocean.
"You engage Your own followers in relishing Your glorious pastimes of married
relationships with the queens of Dvärakä, as well as Your unwedded relationships
with the milkmaids in the pastoral abode of Vraja. You have descended for the
happiness and welfare of the universe. Please protect this fallen soul, O ocean of
mercy!

vairägya-vidyä-nija-bhakti-yoga- / çikärtham ekaù puruaù puräëaù
çré-këa-caitanya-çaréra-dhäré / kpämbudhir yas tam aha prapadye
17
vairägya-vidyä - knowledge of renunciation; nija-bhakti-yoga - devotional
service to Himself; çika-artham - in order to teach; ekaù - the one; puruaù Personality; puräëaù - primeval; çré-këa-caitanya - of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya; çaréradhäré - accepted the bodily form; kpä-ambudhi - ocean of mercy; ya - who; tam Him; aham - I; prapadye - I surrender.
"The primeval Personality of Godhead has accepted the form of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya
for the purpose of teaching the process of bhakti to Himself and the science of

[p.462]
vairägya (detachment from sense gratification). He is an ocean of mercy. I therefore
take shelter of Him.

kälän naöa bhakti-yoga nija yaù / prädukarttu këa-caitanya-nämä
avirbhütas tasya pädäravinde / gäòha gäòha léyatä citta-bhìgaù 18
kälät - from the passage of time; naöam - lost; bhakti-yogam - the process of
devotional connection; nijam - own; yaù - who; prädukartum - to manifest; këacaitanya-nämä - named Kåñëa Caitanya; ävirbhüta - become present before the
eyes; tasya - His päda-aravinde - at the lotus feet; gäòham gäòham - deeper and
deeper; léyatäm - may it become absorbed; citta-bhìgaù - the bee of my mind.
"Since the passage of time has obscured the process of bhakti, the Lord has
appeared in order to renovate that process, accepting the name Çré Kåñëa Caitanya.
May the bee of my mind become absorbed deeper and deeper in the honey of His
lotus feet."

iti nigaditavanta särvvabhauma kareëa / sa-rasam ati-javena snehabhävena dhtvä
nija-hdi vinidhäyäliìgana sa pracakre / vara-bhuja-yugalena çrépatir bhakta-vaçyaù 19
iti - thus; nigaditavantam - speaking; särvabhaumam - by Särvabhauma; kareëa by the hand; sa-rasam - with mellows; ati-javena - quickly; sneha-bhävena - in an
affectionate mood; dhtvä - took; nija-hdi - in His heart; vinidhäya - placing;
äliìganam - embracing; sa - He; pracakre - He did; vara-bhuja-yugalena - with
his beautiful pair of arms; çré-pati - the husband of Çré Lakñmé; bhakta-vaçyaù controlled by His devotee.
After Särvabhauma recited these rasa-imbued çlokas, that Lord of Çré Lakñmé, who
is forever controlled by His bhakta's love, at once affectionately took that bhakta's
hand in His and embraced him to His heart with His two beautiful arms.

[p.463]
Thus ends the Twelfth Sarga entitled "Lord Gauräìga Shows Mercy to
Särvabhauma," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Thirteenth Sarga
särvabhauma-säntvanam
The Lord Departs and Consoles Särvabhauma

eva katipaya käla / kréitvä saha vaiëavaiù
çré-käçénätha-miçreëa / vaiëavägryeëa dhématä 1
sammantrya bhagavän këas / térthänä pävanecchayä
puëyäny aketra-gamane / mati cakre mahä-dyutiù 2
evam - thus; katipayam - some; kälam - time; kréitvä - sported; saha - together;
vaiëavaiù - with the vaiñëavas; çré-käçé-nätha-miçreëa - by Çré Käçénätha Miçra;
vaiëava-agryeëa - by the chief vaiñëava; dhématä - intelligent; sammantrya invited; bhagavän - the all-opulent Personality of Godhead; këa - the allattractive; térthänäm - of the holy places; pävana-icchayä - because of a desire to
purify; puëyäni - the holy places; aketra - outside of Kñetra (the land of
Jagannätha); gamane - to go; matim cakre - He fixed His mind; mahä-dyutiù very splendrous.
Gaura Këa then accepted an invitation to reside in the home of the intelligent and
exalted vaiñëava, Käçénätha Miçra. The reservoir of limitless opulence, then passed
some time in sportive pastimes with the vaiñëavas. Then, desiring to purify the
térthas, He resolved to leave Çré Ketra, the land of Jagannätha Svämé.

tato gatvä jagannätha / dövä çré-puruottamam

[p.464]
natvä ta bhakti-bhävena / netra-dhärä-pariplutaù 3
tata - then; gatvä - going; jagannätham - the Lord of the universe; dövä - seeing;
çré-purua-uttamam - the best of males; natvä - bowing down; tam - Him; bhaktibhävena - with devotional fervor; netra-dhärä - torrents of tears; pariplutaù drenched.
Thus He went to see Lord Jagannätha. When He saw that best of males, He bowed
down before Him with ardent devotion and became drenched by torrents of tears.

uväca madhurä väëé / sa-gadgada-girä hariù
ktäïjali-puöaù prema-paripürëa-su-vigrahaù 4
uväca - He spoke; madhuräm - sweet; väëém - words; sa-gadgada-girä - with
faltering voice; hariù - the remover of inauspiciousness; kta-aïjali-puöaù - with
hands folded in supplication; prema-paripürëa - consummate Kåñëa-love; suvigrahaù - sublime form.
Çré Gaura Hari, whose noble form is the ultimate consummation of Kåñëa-prema,
with hands folded in supplication, falteringly addressed Jagannätha Swämé with
these charming words:

deva tvat-ketra-väse me / nädhikäro yato 'bhavat
tato 'nya-ketra-gamane / matir me jäyate prabho 5
deva - O Divine Lord; tvat-ketra-väse - residing in Your land; me - of Me; na not; adhikära - privilege; yata - because; abhavat - it was; tata - therefore; anyaketra-gamane - to go to other lands; mati - mind; me - My; jäyate - it is born;
prabho - O Master.
"O Divine Lord, because I am not worthy to reside in Your holy land, a desire has
arisen in My heart to visit other lands.

[p.465]
vaktra räkä-pati-präkhya / çarat-paìkaja-locanam
dérgha-bimbauöha-radana-cchada sädhu su-vakasam 6
dövä kasya mano yäti / keträntara-gatau hare
tasmän nästy atra me deva / sthitau te tädçé kpä 7
vaktram - face; räkä-pati - night-protector (the moon); präkhyam - like; çaratpaìkaja - the lotus flower of autumn; locanam - eyes; dérgha - long; bimba bimba fruit; oöha - lips; radana-chadam - hiding teeth; sädhu - O how sublime!;
su-vakasam - broad chest; dövä - having seen; kasya - whose?; mana - mind; yäti it goes; ketra-antara - to another land; gatau - on a path; hare - O remover of
sin; tasmät - therefore; na asti - there is not; atra - in this respect; me - of Me;
deva - O Lord; sthitau - situated; te - Your; tädçé - so much; kpä - mercy.
"Your face is bright as the lord of the night. Your eyes resemble the blossoming
lotuses of autumn. Your wide lips, red as bimba fruit, hide pearl-like teeth. How
sublime! Who, having beheld Your broad chest, can desire to go to any other land?
Therefore, O Lord Hari, You have not bestowed very great mercy on Me.

kñeträny anyäni gacchämi / tava drañöu janärddana
tathä mä kuru me deva / yathä tértha aham vraje 8
kñeträni - lands; anyäni - other; gacchämi - I am going; tava - of You; drañöum to see; jana-ardana - O inspirer of the hearts of mankind; tathä - thus; mäm Me; kuru - do; me - to Me; deva - O Lord; yathä - so; tértham - holy place; aham I; vraje - I go.
"O Janärdana, who inspires the hearts of all, I am going to see Your other kñetras.
O Divine Lord! Bess Me with the power to wander throughout the holy places.

yävat syäc caïcala citta / na syäd yävat su-nirmalam
tävat térthäni puëyäni / vicaret sarvvataù pumän 9

[p.466]
yävat - as long; syät - it may be; caïcalam - flickering; cittam - the mind; na not; syät - it may be; yävat - as long; su-nirmalam - free of contamination; tävat until then; térthäni - sanctified bathing places; puëyäni - holy; vicaret - one
should wander; sarvataù - throughout; pumän - a man.
"As long as his mind is flickering and is not fully purified, a man should wander
throughout all the holy térthas.

tataù su-nirmale citte / sthéra-dhéù puruottame
niväsa kurute nitya / pathikaù sväçrame yathä 10
tataù - then; su-nirmale - fully purified; citte - mind; sthéra-dhéù - determined
intelligence; purua-uttame - in the land of the Supreme Person; niväsam residence; kurute - one makes; nityam - perpetual; pathikaù - the pilgrim; svaäçrame - one's shelter; yathä - as.
"Then, when his mind is fully purified, he should return and perpetually reside in
Çré Puruñottama-dhäma with fixed determination, as a traveller happily returns to
his own äçrama."

eva vadati caitanye / gréväyäç cänulambitam
mälya papäta këasya / päda-sihäsanopari 11
evam - thus; vadati - He spoke; caitanye - the personality of the living force;
gréväyä - from the neck; ca - indeed; anulambitam - hanging; mälyam - garland;
papäta - it fell; këasya - of Kåñëa; päda-siha-äsana-upari - on the foot of the lionseat.
As Çré Caitanya was thus speaking, a garland hanging from Çré Kåñëa's neck fell to
the foot of His lion-seat.

pratihäré tadädäya / jagannäthäjïayä mudä
dadau prasäda-rüpa tan-mälya caitanya-mürddhani 12

[p.467]
pratihäré - attendant priest; tadä - then; ädäya - giving; jagannätha-äjïayä - by
the order of Jagannätha; mudä - happily; dadau - gave; prasäda-rüpam - the sign
of His favor; tat-mälyam - His garland; caitanya-mürdhani - upon the head of
Caitanya.
Then the attendant priest, in accordance with Jagannätha Svämé's order, joyously
placed that garland upon the head of Çré Caitanya as a sign of the Lord's blessing.

tataù so 'pi mahä-tejäù / praphulla-vadano hariù
sva-prema-näma-sampürëo / 'gacchad dvirada-vikramaù 13
tataù - then; sa api - that very person; mahä-tejäù - great energy; praphullavadana - blossoming face; hariù - the dispeller of evil; sva-prema - love for
Himself; näma-sampürëa - filled with the names; agacchat - He went; dvi-radavikramaù - with the prowess of a two-tusked elephant.
Thereafter, Gaura's face blossomed, and His mouth filled with the names of Çré
Kåñëa. His heart filled with love and He set forth with tremendous energy, moving
with the momentum of an elephant.

eva lokänuçikärtha / bhütvä premärdra-locanaù
käçé-miçräçrama gatvä / ta präha çré-çacé-sutaù 14
evam - thus; loka - the people; anuçika - teaching according to disciplic
succession; artham - purpose; bhütvä - becoming; prema-ärdra-locanaù - eyes
moist with love; käçé-miçra; äçramam - the spiritual retreat; gatvä - going; tam him; präha - He said; çré-çacé-sutaù - the illustrious son of Çacé.
In this mood, the illustrious son of Çacé, desiring to teach humanity the path of
devotion as received through disciplic succession, went to the äçrama of Käçé Miçra
and with eyes moistened by tears of Kåñëa-prema addressed him as follows:

bhavanta eva paçyantu / puruottamam éçvaram

[p.468]
aha térthäöane yämi / jagannäthena vaïcitaù 15
bhavanta - your grace; eva - surely; paçyantu - must look; purua-uttamam - at
the ultimate person; éçvaram - the Supreme Lord; aham - I; tértha-äöane - for
wandering to the holy places; yämi - I am going; jagat-näthena - by the Lord of
the universe; vaïcitaù - cheated.
"Your grace is certainly blessed, for you remain here to contemplate the
countenance of Puruñottama-deva; whereas I, having been tricked by Him, must now
wander to see all of the térthas."

tat çrutvä vyathito bhütvä / käçé-näthah prabhoù pade
papäta daëòavat tasmin / kitau sa praruroda ca 16
tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; vyathita - agitated; bhütvä - becoming; käçé-näthah the vaiñëava; prabhoù - of our Master; pade - at the feet; papäta - he fell; daëòavat - flat like a rod; tasmin - on that; kitau - earth; sa - he; praruroda - cried
loudly; ca - and.
Hearing this, Käçénätha became extremely agitated. He fell like a rod to the earth
at Mahäprabhu's feet and loudly cried out:

katha näbhüt putra-çoko / mahä-rugno 'bhavan na kim
caitanya-caraëämbhoja-viçleo 'ya katha mama 17
katham - how?; na - not; abhüt - it was; putra-çoka - the death of my son; mahärugna - great disease; abhavat - it was; na kim - why not?; caitanya-caraëaambhoja - the lotus feet of Caitanya; viçlea - separation; ayam - this; katham why?; mama - my.
"Oh! Why has my son not died? Why am I not afflicted by some incurable disease?
Oh! Why rather am I now to be separated from the lotus feet of Çré Caitanya?"

[p.469]
eva sa viluöhan bhümau / çoka-pürëo muhur muhuù
säntvitaù karuëärdreëa / punar ägamanädinä 18
evam - thus; sa - He; viluöhan - rolling about; bhümau - on the ground; çokapürëa - filled by grief; muhu muhuù - repeatedly; säntvitaù - pacified; karuëäärdreëa - with His heart soft with compassion; puna - again; ägamana-ädinä - by
words of comfort, such as, "I shall return."
Thus overcome with grief, he rolled to and fro on the ground. Then Çré Gauräìga,
His heart melting with compassion, comforted him saying, "I shall return," and
other words of good will.

tataù çré-särvvabhaumasya / gha gatvä jagad-guruù
äjïä yayäce bhagavän / térthänä gamanecchayä 19
tataù - then; çré-särvabhaumasya - of Çré Särvabhauma; gham - home; gatvä going; jagat-guruù - the spiritual guide of the cosmos; äjïäm - order; yayäce - He
begged; bhagavän - the Lord; térthänäm - of the holy places; gamana - going;
icchayä - because of wishing.
Next the all-opulent Personality of Godhead, who had accepted the role of the guru
of all beings visited the home of Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya and begged for
permission to depart, expressing His wish to travel to all the térthas.

çrutvä sa-rodana präha / dhtvä këa-padämbujam
katha näbhüd vajra-pätaù / çirasi me mahä-bhuja 20
çrutvä - hearing; sa-rodanam - while weeping; präha - he said; dhtvä - holding;
këa-pada-ambujam - Kåñëa's lotus feet; katham - how?; na - not; abhüt - there
was; vajra-pätaù - a lightning bolt; çirasi - on the head; me - my; mahä-bhuja - O
great-armed one.
Hearing this, Särvabhauma grasped Çré Kåñëa's feet and weeping, exclaimed, "O

[p.470]
mighty-armed Lord, why rather has a bolt of lightning not fallen on my head?

tvat-päda-rahita präëa / katha dhäsyämy aha prabho
mä ghétvä yatra kutra / gamana karttum arhasi 21
tvat-päda-rahitam - separated from Your feet; präëam - life-force; katham how?; dhäsyämi - I shall sustain; aham - I; prabho - O Master; mäm - me; ghétvä taking; yatra kutra - here and there?; gamanam - going; kartum - to do; arhasi should you.
"Prabhu, how can I maintain my life force in separation from Your lotus feet? Now
that You have captured my heart, is it befitting for You to travel here and there?"

eva çrutvä prahasyäsau / dhtvä tasya kara-dvayam
ägamiyämy adérgheëa / kälenety äha keçavaù 22
evam - thus; çrutvä - hearing; prahasya - laughing; asau - He; dhtvä - held;
tasya - his; kara-dvayam - two hands; ägamiyämi - I shall return; adérgheëa before long; kälena - time; iti - thus; äha - He said; keçavaù - the Lord with fine
hair.
Hearing this, Gaura Keçava laughed merrily and, capturing Särvabhauma's hands in
His own, replied, "I shall return before long."

vadanta ta samäliìgya / karuëä-pürëa-vigrahaù
säntvayäm äsa sva-premnä / nänänunaya-kovidaù 23
vadantam - saying; tam - Him; samäliìgya - embracing; karuëä-pürëa - filled
with mercy; vigrahaù - form; säntvayäm äsa - pacified; sva-premnä - by His
personal love; nänä - many; anunaya-kovidaù - expert at conciliation.
Speaking thus, Çré Caitanya, the embodiment of compassion, who is very wise in
comforting the distressed heart, warmly embraced Särvabhauma and pacified his

[p.471]
heart by His loving and personal mood.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Sarga entitled "The Lord Departs and Consoles
Särvabhauma," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fourteenth Sarga
çré-jiyaòa-nsiha-prasaìgaù
Çré Caitanya Shows Devotion to Jiyaòa-Nåsiha

särvvabhauma-bhaööäcäryyaù / sa udvigno hy acetanaù
eva bhaktäs tadaiväsan / sarvva udvigna-mänasäù 1
särvabhauma-bhaööäcäryaù - the incarnation of Båhaspati, the priest of Indra;
sa - he; udvigna - perturbed; hi - indeed; acetanaù - unconscious; evam - thus;
bhaktä - the devotees; tadä - then; eva - very; asan - they were; sarve - all;
udvigna-mänasäù - disturbed in heart.
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya was so disturbed by Gauräìga's departure that he
fainted on that very spot. Similarly, the hearts of all the other devotees were very
much perturbed.

tataù çré-këa-caitanyaç / calito dakiëä diçam
älälanätham ägatya / premäd deham adhairyyataù 2
tataù - then; çré-këa-caitanya - the avatära for this age of quarrel; calita walking; dakiëäm - southern; diçam - direction; äläla-nätham - _-läla-nätha, He
who cherishes all; ägatya - coming; premät - out of love; deham - body;
adhairyataù - agitated.

[p.472]
But Çré Kåñëa Caitanya walked forth southwards, until He arrived at the temple of
_lälanätha (the Lord who cherishes all). On account of prema, Gaura's body was
constantly agitated by ecstatic symptoms.

këa këeti këeti / uväcoccair muhu muhuù
kaëa viluöhate bhümau / kaëa mürcchati jalpati 3
këa - Kåñëa; iti - thus; uväca - He uttered; uccai - loudly; muhu muhuù repeatedly; kaëam - at one moment; viluöhate - He rolled; bhümau - on the
ground; kaëam - at one moment; mürcchati - He fainted; jalpati - He murmured
inarticulately.
In a loud voice, He cried out repeatedly, "Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa!" At one moment He
would roll on the ground, and the next moment He would swoon and inarticulately
murmur Kåñëa's names.

kñaëa gäyati govinda-këa-rämeti nämabhiù
mahä-prema-pluta gätra / älälanätha-darçane 4
kaëam - at one moment; gäyati - He sings; govinda-këa-räma - many names of
the Lord; iti - thus; nämabhiù - with the names; mahä-prema - great love for
Kåñëa; plutam - immersed; gätram - body; älälanätha-darçane - in seeing the
Deity of _läla-nätha.
And at the next moment, He would loudly sing the names, "Govinda! Kåñëa!
Räma!" As He beheld the Deity of _lälanätha, His body became flooded with the
ecstatic symptoms of mahä-prema.

kaïcit pathi jana döam / äliìgat çakti-saïcaraiù
sa tatra prema-vivaço / ntyan gäyan mudaiva ca 5
kvacit - sometimes; pathi - on the road; janam - a man; döam - seen; äliìgat - he
embraced; çakti-saïcaraiù - by empowering; sa - he; tatra - there; prema-vivaça -

[p.473]
helpless in the ocean of love; ntyan - dancing; gäyan - singing; mudä - with joy;
eva - indeed; ca - and.
When Gaura Hari was travelling on the path, whenever He saw any man, He would
embrace him. By that embrace He invested that person with full transcendental
potencies. Suddenly drowned within the ocean of ecstatic love for Kåñëa, that man
would also begin to sing and dance in great bliss.

nija-geha jagäma sa / prema-dhärä-çata-plutaù
anya-gräma-janän dtvä / premäliìgam akärayat 6
nija-geham - own home; jagäma - he went; sa - he; prema - love; dhärä-çata hundreds of streams; plutaù - covered; anya-gräma - other towns; janän people; dtvä - seeing; prema-äliìgam - embrace of love; akärayat - he enacted.
As that man was returning to his home, with his body flooded by hundreds of
streams of tears, he would also give the embrace of love to the members of other
villages.

te punaù prema-viçränta / gäyanti ca ramanti ca
eva paramparä yeu / tän sarvvän samakärayat 7
te - they; punaù - also; prema-viçräntam - satisfied in love of Kåñëa; gäyanti sing; ca - and; ramanti - rejoice; ca - and; evam - thus; paramparä - by disciplic
succession; yeu - in whichever villages; tän - them; sarvän - all; samakärayat He bestowed liberally.
They also felt great satisfaction in the bliss of prema and taking great delight, they
sang the names of Kåñëa. In this way, through the process of disciplic succession,
Çré Gauräìga transformed into vaiñëavas, the people of all the towns and villages.

älälanätha-ketre sa / rätraika sannyaväsayat
tataù para-divotthäya / prätaù käryya samäpayat 8

[p.474]
äläla-nätha-ketre - in the lands of _lälanätha; sa - He; rätra-ekam - one night;
sannyaväsayat - He resided; tataù - then; para-divä - on the next day; utthäya rising; prätaù - early; käryam - duties; samäpayat - He accomplished.
He dwelt one night in that land sacred to _lälanätha-deva, and on the morrow He
rose early and performed His morning duties.

pracalan dakiëa-deçam / uväca iti ntyati
këa këa këa këa këa këa këa he!
këa këa këa këa këa këa këa he!

këa këa këa këa këa këa raka mäm!
këa këa këa këa këa këa pähi mäm! 9

pracalan - setting forth; dakiëa-deçam - southern country; uväca - He uttered;
iti - thus; ntyati - He danced.
Then setting forward to the southern lands, Gaura Hari danced and sang:
Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Oh!
Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Oh!
Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Protect Me!
Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Kåñëa! Protect Me!

iti paöhati sa mantra prema-viplävitäçrur / luöhati dharaëé-madhye
dhävati ca prakampaiù
iha harir iti väkyair bäpa-ruddhävakaëöho / rudati taru-latäyä
prema-döi karoti 10
iti - thus; paöhati - recited; sa - He; mantram - mind-releasing vibration; prema love; viplävita - made to float about; açru - tears; luöhati - He rolled; dharaëémadhye - in the midst of the earth; dhävati - He runs; ca - and; prakampaiù with immense trembling; iha - at that time; hari - the dispeller of evil; iti - thus;

[p.475]
väkyai - with His words; bäpa - tears; ruddha - choked; avakaëöha - throat; rudati
- He wept; taru-latäyäm - on the trees and creepers; prema-döim - glance of love;
karoti - He made.
While He chanted this mantra, tears of prema fell from His eyes. Those tears
formed an ocean of love, and upon the billows of that ocean He floated about, lost to
the world of externals. He rolled about on the earth, His body trembled greatly,
Then He would run swiftly. Çré Hari's throat bacame choked as He wept, and He cast
affectionate glances at the creeper-covered trees.

ägate kürmma-ketre ca / kürmma-rüpé janärddanaù
kürmma-nämä ca viprendro / gataù satkti-karmmaëi 11
bhojayan çraddhayä sv-anna / prasäda kürma éçvaram 12
ägate - came; kürma-ketre - the lands of the Deity Kurma; ca - and; kürma-rüpé
- the form of a tortoise; janärdanaù - Lord Viñëu (thriller of men's hearts);
kürma-nämä - named Kürma; ca - and; vipra-indra - best of learned brähmaëas;
gataù - went; sat-kti-karmaëi - in the practice of hospitality; bhojayan - gave
food; çraddhayä - with faith; su-anna - fine foods; prasädam - food-remnants of
the Lord; kürma - the brähmaëa; éçvaram - to the Supreme Lord.
When He arrived at Kürma Kñetra, where Çré Janärdana forever resides in His Deity
form of a tortoise, an exalted vipra also of the name Kürma came and offered Him a
hospitable reception. With greta respect, He fed the Lord nicely prepared prasäda.

tato jagäma bhagavän / lokänugraha-kämyayä
kürma-ketre jagannätha / dadarça kürma-rüpiëam 13
tata - then; jagäma - He went; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; loka-anugraha mercy for the people; kämyayä - because of wishing; kürma-ketre - in the lands
of Kürma; jagat-nätham; dadarça - He saw; kürma-rüpiëam - in His form of the
tortoise avatära.
Then, desiring to show mercy to the people, the Lord went to the temple of Kürma

[p.476]
and saw Jagannätha Svämé there in His form of Kürma-deva.

kürma-nämä dvijaù kaçcit / tad-darçana-mahotsavaù
ätithya vidadhe harän / mänayan sa-phala dinam 14
kürma-nämä - of the name Kürma; dvijaù - the brähmaëa; kaçcit - a certain; tatdarçana - at His sight; mahä-utsavaù - a great festival; ätithyam - a guest; vidadhe took; harät - out of joy; mänayan - considering; sa-phalam - fruitful; dinam - day.
That brähmaëa, named Kürma felt engladdened by the sight of Çré Gauräìga. With
great happiness, he invited the Lord to be his guest, and considered his day
completely fulfilled.

väsudevo dvija-çreöho / dövä çré-puruottamam
tad-darçana-samulläsaiù / këa jïätvä nanartta ca 15
väsudeva - the leper vaiñëava; dvija-çreöha - an eminent brähmaëa; dövä having seen; çré-purua-uttamam - the transcendental Person; tat-darçana - His
sight; samulläsaiù - by the brilliant characteristics; këam - the original
Personality of Godhead; jïätvä - knowing; nanarta - he danced; ca - and.
Another brähmaëa of the name Väsudeva saw Çré Gaura Hari, whose personality is
transcendental to this world of cause and effect. Perceiving the brilliant qualities of
His person, he recognized Him to be Kåñëa Himself, and began to dance.

ta kuöa-rogiëa vipra / mahä-bhägavatottamam
äliìgya bhagaväç cakre / svarëa-känti-sama-prabham 16
tam - him; kuöa - with leprosy; rogiëam - sick; vipram - the learned brähmaëa;
mahä-bhägavata - great devotee; uttamam - transcendentally situated; äliìgya embracing; bhagavän - the all opulent Lord; cakre - He transformed; svarëakänti - golden luster; sama - like; prabham - effulgence.

[p.477]
Although afflicted by leprosy, that vipra, was a transcendentally-situated soul and
a mahä-bhägavata-bhakta. Çré Caitanya embraced him and thus transformed him into
a healthy man with a golden luster .

tau dövä prema-sampürëau / sva-bhaktau präha çré-patiù
mad-ajïayä këa-bhakti / lokäë grähayatä sukham 17
tau - the two; dövä - seeing; prema-sampürëau - filled with love; sva-bhaktau His devotees; präha - He said; çré-patiù - the husband of Lakñmé; mat-ajïayä - by
My order; këa-bhaktim - devotion to Kåñëa; lokäë - the people; grähayatäm make accept; sukham - happily.
Looking upon these two devotees, who were now fully satisfied by love of Kåñëa,
the husband of the goddess of fortune addressed them, "By My order, kindly induce
all people to accept the path of Kåñëa-bhakti and become happy!"

evam uktvä gaura-candras / tathaiväntardadhe hariù
vismäpayan sarvva-lokän / këa-këeti kérttayan 18
evam - thus; uktvä - saying; gaura-candra - the Golden Moon; tathä - so; eva verily; antardadhe - He disappeared; hariù - the dispeller of sin; vismäpayan astonishing; sarva-lokän - all the people; këa-këa - the name of Kåñëa; iti - thus;
kértayan - chanting.
So saying, Çré Gaura Candra disappeared from that spot. This astonished all the
people, who then began to continuously chant the name of Kåñëa.

kiyad düra samägatya / jiyaòäkhya nsihakam
dadarça parama-prétaù / premäçru-pulakäïcitaù 19
kiyat - so much; düram - far; samägatya - proceeding; jiyaòa-äkhyam - named
Jiyaa; n-sihakam - man-lion; dadarça - He saw; parama-prétaù - greatly pleased;
prema-açru - tears of love; pulaka-aïcitaù - hairs erected.

[p.478]
After Gaura had proceeded a considerable distance, He came to the temple of Lord
Nåsiha named Jiyaòa and looked upon the Deity with great delight. Out of love,
tears fell from His eyes and His body became covered by pulakas.

tasya sva-bhaktädhénatva-kathäm präha purätaném
sa eva jagatä näthaù / svaya bhakta-jana-priyaù 20
tasya - the Deity's; sva-bhakta - to His own devotees; adhénatva submissiveness; kathäm - history; präha - He related; purätaném - ancient; sa eva that very same; jagatäm - of all sentient beings; näthaù - Lord; svayam - in
Person; bhakta-jana-priyaù - the beloved of His devotees.
The Lord of all beings, who is dear to His bhaktas, then told the people an ancient
history which illustrates the Lord's quality of subordination to His devotee:

atraiväsét purä kaçcit / puëòrayeti samäkhyayä
ki-balo hi vikhyäto / mäyämbu-phalam arjayet 21
atra - here; eva - indeed; asét - there was; purä - once; kaçcit - a certain;
puëòraya - named Puëraya; iti - thus; samäkhyayä - well-known; ki-bala - strong
as an ox; hi - certainly; vikhyäta - renowned; mäyä-ambu-phalam - wheat; arjayet
- he would earn.
"Once, long ago, a man named Puëòraya lived here. He was renowned for his oxlike strength, and he earned his living by growing wheat.

varäha-rüpiëä khaëòa / vikhaëòa ktinä samam
yuyodha balavän gopaù / kta-puëyo muräriëä 22
varäha-rüpiëä - in the form of a boar; khaëòam - filled with chasms;
vikhaëòam - uneven; ktinä - made; samam - even; yuyodha - he fought; balavän the strong; gopaù - cowherd; kta-puëya - done many pious deeds; muräriëä - by

[p.479]
the enemy of Madhu.
"Ln the form of a boar, Lord Muräri appeared to him and made his evenly plowed
field uneven and filled with chasms. That pious, strong-armed gopa then fought with
the Lord.

bäëa-viddhena tenäpi / räma-rämeti kérttanät
jïäto 'sav éçvara iti / copaväsädim äcarat 23
bäëa - an arrow; viddhena - by piercing; tena - by that cowherd; api - verily;
räma-räma - the name of Räma; iti - thus; kértanät - by the chanting; jïäta understood; asau - He; éçvara - the Supreme Lord; iti - thus; ca - and; upaväsaädim - fasting and so forth; äcarat - he practiced.
"When the boar was pierced by Puëòraya's arrow, it repeatedly chanted the holy
name of Räma, and for that reason Puëòraya understood that this boar was an
incarnation of I~çvara . Therefore he atoned for his offense by fasting and other
penances.

dayälur bhagavän äha / dugdha-sekena sarvvathä
darçana me präpsyasi tva / räjïä saha tathä vacaù 24
dayälu - merciful; bhagavän - Lord; äha - He said; dugdha-sekena - by
sprinkling; sarvathä - all over; darçanam - vision; me - My; präpsyasi - you will
obtain; tvam - you; räjïä saha - with the king; tathä - also; vacaù - instruction.
"The merciful Lord then told him, `Sprinkle milk over your field. In this way, you
will have My darçana. The king must also come to see Me. This is My command.'

çrutvä bhagavato väkya / gopaù prema-pariplutaù
äjïäm avedayat so 'pi / tathäjïä ca tathä 'karot 25
çrutvä - hearing; bhagavata - of the Lord; väkyam - instruction; gopaù - the
cowherd; prema-pariplutaù - immersed in love; äjïäm - order; avedayat -

[p.480]
informed; sa api - that very man; tathä - also; äjïäm - order; ca - and; tathä - so;
akarot - he did.
"Hearing the Lord Boar's instructions, the cowherd, overwhelmed by loving
sentiments for Him, informed the king of the Lord's order, with which the king
complied.

dugdha-secana-mätreëa / bhagavän svam adarçayat
çré-vigraha sajjana ca / niväraëa yathäkarot 26
dugdha-secana - by sprinkling of milk; mätreëa - by simply; bhagavän - the
Lord; svam - own; adarçayat - showed; çré-vigraham - the transcendental form;
sat-janam - saintly men; ca - and; niväraëam - prevention; yathä - as; äkarot - He
did.
"Simply by the sprinkling of milk, the Lord showed Himself in His transcendental
form to saintly persons and prevented others from seeing Him.

kiyat kälävasänena / värtta-vittaç ca kaçcana
ägato darçanärthé sa / bhäryyäbhyä samanuvrataù 27
kiyat - so much; käla-ävasänena - after the passing of time; värtta-vitta - a
wealthy merchant; ca - and; kaçcana - some; ägata - came; darçana-arthé desiring a sight; sa - he; bhäryäbhyäm - with his two wives; samanuvrataù devoted.
"After some time passed, a certain wealthy man who was very devoted arrived in
the company of his two wives, desiring to have the Lord's darçana.

darçanänanda-mattaù çré-mandira ta praviöavän
präpte çré-caraëämbhoje / dövä haram upägataù 28
darçana-änanda - joy of seeing; mattaù - intoxicated; çré-mandiram - the Lord's

[p.481]
temple; tam - that; praviöavän - entered; präpte - upon obtaining; çré-caraëaambhoje - the lotus feet of the Lord; dövä - seeing; haram - bliss; upägataù experienced.
"When He received darçana of Çré Varäha, that man became intoxicated with
pleasure. He entered the temple of Nåsiha, and when he saw that he had obtained
the treasure of the Lord's two lotus feet, he became jubilant.

bhagavän äha ta sädhum / abhépsata-vara vëu
jiyaòeti hi me näma / ghäna jagad-éçvara 29
bhagavän - the Lord; äha - said; tam - to him; sädhum - good man; abhépsatavaram - very earnestly desired boon; vëu - choose; jiyaòa - the name of the
merchant; iti - thus; hi - certainly; me - my; näma - name; ghäna - please take;
jagat-éçvara - O Supreme Lord of the universe.
"The Lord said to that godly man, `Choose from Me whatever boon you desire.'
The man replied, `Jiyaa is my name. Kindly accept this name, O Lord of the
universe.'

om ity äha jagad-yonis / tena ca khyäpito 'bhavat
çré-jiyaòa-nsihaç ca / bhakta-vaçyo hariù sadä 30
om - so be it; iti - thus; äha - He said; jagat-yoni - the creator of the cosmos;
tena - by that; ca - and; khyäpita - made famous; abhavat - He became; çré-jiyaòan-siha - the Nåsiha Deity of the name Jiyaa; ca - and; bhakta-vaçya - controlled
by His devotee; hariù - the remover of sin; sadä - always.
"The origin of the cosmos then muttered, `Om,' indicating His acceptance. For this
reason, this Deity has become famous as Çré Jiyaòa Nåsiha, thus giving evidence that
Çré Hari is always submissive to the will of His devotee."

etad äkhyan hariù säkät / çré-gauräìgo mahäprabhuù
antarddadhe hi tatraiva / kena dtaù kila svayam 31

[p.482]
etat - this; äkhyan - describing; hariù - the dispeller of evil; säkät - direct; çrégauräìga - the Lord of golden form; mahä-prabhuù - the great Master;
antardadhe - disappeared; hi - indeed; tatra - there; eva - indeed; kena - by what
means?; dtaù - seen; kila - truly; svayam - in Person.
After narrating this history, Çré Hari in the person of Çré Gauräìga Mahäprabhu
disappeared from that very spot. Who is that fortunate person able to perceive that
Supreme Lord as He is?

Thus ends the Fourteenth Sarga entitled "Çré Caitanya Shows Devotion to
Jiyaa Nåsiha," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifteenth Sarga
çré-paramänanda-saìgotsava
Çré Gaura Hari's Joyous Meeting with Paramänanda Puré

tataù prabhäte vimale çubhe prabhur / gäyan hari prema-vibhinnadhairyyaù
yayau sa käïcé-nagara jagad-gurur / draöu çré-rämänandäkhyaräyam 1
tataù - then; prabhäte - in the dawn; vimale - pure; çubhe - bright; prabhu - the
Master; gäyan - singing; harim - the names of Hari; prema-vibhinna-dhairyaù His composure broken by love; yayau - He went; sa - He; käïcé-nagaram - the
city of Käïcé; jagat-guru - spiritual guide of all living entities; draöum - to see; çrérämänanda - as Çré Rämänanda; äkhya - known; räyam - the governor.

[p.483]
Then in the clear, pristine light of dawn, Gaura Prabhu, the guru of all living
beings, entered the city of Käïcé. He was singing the names of Hari and His
composure was shattered with Kåñëa-prema. He had come to see Rämänanda Räya,
the provincial governor.

sa sva-ghe këa-püjävasäne / dhyäyan para brahma vrajendranandanam
dadarça vära-trayam adbhüta mahad / gauräìga-mädhuryyam atéva
vismitaù 2
sa - he; sva-ghe - in his home; këa-püjä - worship of Kåñëa; avasäne - after
finishing; dhyäyan - meditating; param brahma - the Supreme Absolute Truth;
vrajendra-nandanam - the delightful son of the king of Vraja; dadarça - he saw;
vära-trayam - three times; adbhütam - wonderful; mahat - great; gauräìgamädhuryam - the sweetness of Gauräìga; atéva - exceeding; vismitaù - amazed.
At that time the governor was in his home, meditating on the delightful son of the
King of Vraja, the Supreme Brahma. He had just concluded his Kåñëa-püjä of the çrévigraha. Then thrice in succession he had a vision of the wonderful and immense
sweetness of Lord Çré Gauräìga, and he became amazed.

unmélya netre ca tad eva rüpa / dövä para brahma sannyäsa-veçam
praëamya mürdhnä vihitaù ktäïjaliù / papraccha kutratya bhavän
iti prabho 3
unmélya - opening; netre - his eyes; ca - and; tat - that; eva - very; rüpam - form;
dövä - seeing; param brahma - the Supreme Spirit; sannyäsa-veçam - in the garb
of a renunciant; praëamya - bowing; mürdhnä - with his head; vihitaù arranged; kta-aïjaliù - folded hands; papraccha - he inquired; kutratya - where
living?; bhavän - Your grace; iti - this; prabho - O Master.
Upon opening his eyes, he saw directly before him that very same form of the
Supreme Brahman, in the garb of a sannyäsé. Bowing his head and folding his hands,
he inquired, "Prabhu, may I know whence Your holiness has come?

[p.484]
hasan prabhuù präha katha na smaryyate / çré-rädhikä-päda-sarojañaöpada
svätmänam eva kathayan svaya hariù / sva-bähu-yugmena tam
äliliìga 4
hasan - laughing; prabhuù - the Master; präha - said; katham - how?; na - not;
smaryate - it is remembered; çré-rädhikä - of Çré Rädhikä; päda-saroja - at the
lotus feet; ñaö-pada - O bee; sva-ätmänam - own self; evam - thus; kathayan saying; svayam - impulsively; hariù - the remover of sin; sva-bähu-yugmena with both arms; tam - him; äliliìga - he embraced him.
Laughing, Prabhu replied, "You are a bee seeking honey at Çré Rädhikä's lotus feet!
Why have you forgotten your identity?" So saying, Çré Hari embraced Rämänanda
with both arms.

vndäöavé-keli-rahasyam adbhuta / prakäçya tasmin rasikendramauliù
äjïäpya ketra-gamanäya sa-tvara / ta säntvayitvä sa yayau
janärddanaù 5
vndä-aöavé-keli - the sports of Våndävana; rahasyam - confidential; adbhutam astonishing; prakäçya - displaying; tasmin - in that place; rasika - of those expert
in relishing rasa; indra-mauliù - the crest-jewel; äjïäpya - ordering; ketragamanäya - to go to Kñetra; sa-tvaram - swiftly; tam - him; säntvayitvä pacifying; sa - He; yayau - He departed; jana-ardanaù - the inspirer of the hearts
of men.
Çré Gaura, the crest jewel of rasikas, then and there revealed to Rämänanda the
confidential and astounding pleasure-pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa in the groves
of Våndävana. Afterwards He instructed Rämänanda to go quickly to Çré Kñetra.
Having pacified Rämänanda's heart with sweet words, Çré Janärdana, who resides
within and inspires the hearts of all mankind departed.

[p.485]
çré-räma-govinda-këeti gäyann / uttéryya godävarém eva këaù
viveça çré-païcavaté-vana mahat / çré-räma-sétä-smaraëäti-vihvalaù
6
çré-räma-govinda-këa - the names of the Lord; iti - thus; gäyan - singing;
uttérya - crossing; go-dä-varém - sacred river, bestower of water for the cows; eva
- indeed; këaù; viveça - He entered; çré-païcavaté-vanam - the forest; mahat great; çré-räma-sétä-smaraëa - remembering Çré Räma and Sétä; ati-vivihvalaù intensely entranced.
As Çré Kåñëa Caitanya travelled, He sang the names, "Çré Räma! Govinda! Kåñëa!"
Crossing the Godävaré River, He entered the great forest of Päïcavaté and became
wholly entranced by remembrance of Sétä-Räma.

tataù para çré-jagad-éçvaraù prabhuç / calan pthivyä kakubhaù
prakäçayan
käverém uttéryya çré-raìga-nätha / döväti-höo hi nanartta sädaram 7
tataù param - after that; çré-jagat-éçvaraù - the resplendent Master of the
cosmos; prabhu - the Master; calan - walking; pthivyäm - on the earth; kakubhaù directions; prakäçayan - illuminating; käverém - sacred river; uttérya - crossing
over; çré-raìga-nätham - the pleasure-Lord, the great Deity of Viñëu; dövä seeing; ati-höa - very jubilant; hi - verily; nanarta - He danced; sädaram - with
veneration.
Thereafter, Çré Jagadéçvara walked upon the earth, illuminating all directions. After
crossing the holy Käveré River, Prabhu joyously saw with reverence the great Deity
of Viñëu named Çré Raìganätha and danced before Him in boundless delight.

çré-raìganäthasya samépa vipro / gétä paöhan çuddha-vicära-çünyam
premäçru-pürëa sa nirékya këa / äliìgya präha çrutam eva yogyam
8

[p.486]
çré-raìga-näthasya - of Çré Raìganätha; samépam - near; vipra - a learned
brähmaëa; gétäm - Bhagavad-Gétä; paöhan - reciting; çuddha-vicära - pure
understanding of Sanskrit; çünyam - without; prema-açru - of tears of love;
pürëam - full; sa - He; nirékya - observing; këa - Kåñëa Caitanya; äliìgya embracing; präha - declared; çrutam - this process of hearing; eva - certainly;
yogyam - proper.
A brähmaëa seated near Lord Raìganätha was reciting the verses of Bhagavad-Gétä,
although he did not have clear comprehension of the meaning of the Sanskrit verses.
But upon observing that that brähmaëa's eyes were filled with tears, Gaura-Kåñëa
embraced him, declaring, "Oh, your process of hearing the Gétä is indeed correct!"

tatraiva kaçcid dvija-väryya-sattamo / dövä prabhu gaura-su-dérghavigraham
premäçru-pürëa sa jagäda bandhu / çré-këa-varëa manasä
vicärayan 9
tatra - there; eva - indeed; kaçcit - a certain; dvija-värya-sattama - elevated
brähmaëa; dövä - seeing; prabhum - the Master; gaura - golden; su-dérghavigraham - very tall form; prema-açru-pürëam - filled with tears of love; sa - he;
jagäda - he uttered; bandhum - the friend; çré-këa-varëam - chanting the names
of Çré Kåñëa; manasä - with the mind; vicärayan - understanding.
There was a highly advanced brähmaëa who was present in that temple. He
observed that our Prabhu's beautiful golden body was of great stature. He saw that
His eyes were filled with tears, and that His tongue constantly vibrated the sacred
syllables "Kåñ-ëa." Considering these symptoms, he concluded that this person must
be none other than Çré Kåñëa, the true friend of all people.

aho! svabhägya manasä vimya / trimalla-nämä kila bhaööa-räjaù
tasya prabhoù çré-caraëa karäbhyä / dhtvä prahöaù karuëä
nyavedayat 10

[p.487]
aho! - Oh!; sva-bhägyam - his own good fortune; manasä - in his mind; vimya considering; tri-malla-nämä - of the name Trimalla; kila - indeed; bhaööa-räjaù king of scholars; tasya - of that; prabhoù - of the Master; çré-caraëam - blessed
feet; karäbhyäm - with his hands; dhtvä - holding; prahöaù - very joyous;
karuëäm - mercy; nyavedayat - submitted.
That king of learned scholars named Trimalla Bhaööa deliberated, "Aho! What good
fortune I have achieved today!" Then, in vast delight, he clasped Gaura Prabhu's
blessed feet in his hands and pleaded for His mercy:

aho! mahätman karuëena naù prabho / kpä vidhätu satata tvam
arhasi
tatraiva mäyädhamanävatäre / kpämtenäpi jagat sieca 11
aho! - O!; mahä-ätman - great soul; karuëena - on account of compassion; naù for us; prabho - O Master; kpäm - mercy; vidhätum - to bestow; satatam - always;
tvam - You; arhasi - You ought; tatra - there; eva - surely; mäyä - of the illusory
energy; adhamana - making go down; avatäre - in this descent; kpä - mercy;
amtena - by the nectar; api - truly; jagat - the material worlds; sieca - You
shower.
"O Supreme Soul! Dear Prabhu! Kindly always show Your mercy to your servants.
We have heard through çästra that in Your present avatära, Your Lordship is
showering this universe with immortal mercy, and nullifying the power of mäyä.

sarvva jana sthävara-jaìgamädénn / uddharttum anyo na vinäpi
këam
prävò-tur ägata eva nätha / bhtyasya me tva hita-çobhana kuru 12
sarva - all; jana - people; sthävara-jaìgama - moving and non-moving; ädén and so forth; uddhartum - to deliver; anya - other; na - not; vinä - without; api certainly; këam - who halts the cycle of birth and death; prävö - rainy; tu season; ägata - come; eva - indeed; nätha - O Lord; bhtyasya - of Your servant;

[p.488]
me - to me; tvam - You; hita - welfare; çobhanam - grace; kuru - do.
"Certainly none other than Çré Kåñëa Himself can deliver all moving and nonmoving living entities. He Nätha! The rainy season has now begun. Kindly show
Your grace to this servant and bless him."

eva sa bhaktasya madhurä su-väëé / çrutvä tam äliìgya viveça tadgham
dvijo 'pi tat-päda-saroruha su-dhéù / prakälya premnä sa-gaëo
dadhära 13
evam - thus; sa - He; bhaktasya - of the devotee; madhuräm - sweet; su-väëém eloquent words; çrutvä - hearing; tam - him; äliìgya - embracing; viveça - He
entered; tat-gham - his home; dvija - the brähmaëa; api - although; tat-päda-sararuham - His lotus feet; su-dhéù - highly intelligent; prakälya - washing; premnä with love; sa-gaëa - with his people; dadhära - he took.
After hearing these eloquent words from His devotee, Mahäprabhu embraced him
and entered his home. That intelligent brähmaëa then lovingly washed the Lord's
lotus feet, and he placed that water upon his head and drank it together with his
family and friends.

sukhäséna jagannätha / tri-malläkhyo dvijottamah
stré-putra-svajanaiù särddha / sieve prema-nirbharaù 14
sukha - comfortably; äsénam - seated; jagat-nätham - the Lord of the universe;
tri-malla-äkhya - named Trimalla; dvija-uttamah - the exalted brähmaëa; stréputra-sva-janaiù - with his wife, son and relatives; särdham - together; sieve served; prema-nirbharaù - with deep love.
The Master of the universe became situated peacefully, and out of feelings of deep
love, Trimalla Bhaööa rendered service to Him, assisted by his wife, children and
relatives.

[p.489]
gopäla-nämä bälo 'sya / prabhoù pärçve sthitas tadä
ta dövä tasya çirasi / pada-padma dayärdra-dhéù 15
dattvä vada hari ceti / so 'pi hara-samanvitaù
bälya-kréòä parityajya / këa gäyan nanartta ca 16
gopäla-nämä - named Gopäla; bäla - boy; asya - of this; prabhoù - of the
Master; pärçve - at the side; sthita - stayed; tadä - then; tam - him; dövä - seeing;
tasya - his; çirasi - on the head; pada-padmam - lotus feet; dayä-ärdra-dhéù heart melting from mercy; dattvä - giving; vada - please chant; harim - Hari's
name; ca - and; iti - thus; sa api - that very boy; hara-samanvitaù - filled with
bliss; bälya-kréòäm - childish play; parityajya - giving up; këam - the names of
Kåñëa; gäyan - singing; nanarta - He danced; ca - and.
While the brähmaëa's son named Gopäla stood by Prabhu's side, the Lord glanced
on him, His heart melting out of mercy for him. The son of Çacé placed His lotus foot
upon the boy's head and said, "Just chant the name of Hari!" The heart of Gopäla
became filled with jubilation. From thta time on, abandoning all boyish games,
Gopäla solely engaged his time in singing the names of Kåñëa and dancing.

eva hi prävö-samaya sthito hariù / çré-këa-saìkérttana-bhävabhävukaù
çré-raìga-ketra-stha-dvijaiù supüjito / bhikänna-präçädibhir
acyutaù sukham 17
evam - thus; hi - indeed; prävö-samayam - the rainy season; sthita - staying;
hariù - the remover of evil; çré-këa - of Çré Kåñëa's names; saìkértana - the
congregational chanting; bhäva - ecstacy; bhävukaù - heart enlivened; çré-raìgaketra-stha - situated in Çré Raìga-kñetra; dvijaiù - by the brähmaëas; su-püjita nicely honored; bhikä - alms; anna - food; präça - food; ädibhi - and so on;
acyutaù - infallible; sukham - happily.
In this way, the infallible Çré Hari, His heart enlivened by the blissful mellows of

[p.490]
Çré Kåñëa-saìkértana, resided throughout the rainy season in Raìga-ketra, well
honored with offerings of bhikñä from the brähmaëas.

meru-sundara-tanü rasikeçaù / këa-näma-guëa-kérttana-mattaù
rädhikä-rasa-vinoda-gadgada- / prema-väri-paripürita-dehaù 18
meru-sundara - beautiful as Mount Meru; tanu - body; rasika-éçaù - leader of
rasikas; këa-näma-guëa - the names and attributes of Kåñëa; kértana-mattaù intoxicated by Kåñëa; rädhikä-rasa - the mellows of Rädhikä; vinoda - pleasure;
gadgada - choked; prema-väri - tears of love; paripürita-dehaù - body inundated.
That leader of rasikas, whose body was as beautiful as golden Mount Meru, became
intoxicated by descriptions of the names and qualities of Çré Këa. As He delighted in
this way in the moods of Çrématé Rädhikä, His body became washed by tears of
prema, and His voice was choked by tears.

uitvaiva raìga-keträd / gacchan pathi dadarça saù
çré-mädhava-puré-çiya / paramänanda-nämakam 19
uitvä - having dwelt; evam - thus; raìga-keträt - from Raìga-kñetra; gacchan going; pathi - on the path; dadarça - He saw; saù - He; çré-mädhava-puré-çiyam the disciple of Mädhavendra Puré; paramänanda-nämakam - named
Paramänanda.
After residing there in that manner, Çré Gaura left Raìga-khetra. While He was
travelling, He met a disciple of Çré Mädhavendra Puré named Paramänanda.

paçyan çré-paramänanda-puré gauräìga-vigraham
guru-väkyam anusmtya / premäçru-pulakäïcitaù 20
paçyan - seeing; çré-paramänanda-puré - one of the roots of the tree of love of
Godhead; gauräìga-vigraham - the body of Gauräìga; guru-väkyam - the words
of his guru; anusmtya - recalling; prema-açru - tears of love; pulaka-aïcitaù -

[p.491]
hairs thrilled with rapture.
When Paramänanda Puré saw the golden body of Çré Hari, he recalled the words
that his own guru, I~çvara Puré, had once spoken concerning the Lord. Tears of love
came to his eyes, and the his body became covered with pulakas.

éçvaro 'pi puré-päda / sa-bhtya dharmma-pälakaù
nanäma parama-préto / daëòavat çirasä bhuvi 21
éçvara - the Supreme Lord; api - although; puré-pädam - the feet of
Paramänanda Puré; sa-bhtyam - with his servant; dharma-pälakaù - the protector
of religious principles; nanäma - He bowed; parama-préta - in great love; daëòavat - like a rod; çirasä - with His head; bhuvi - on the earth.
Although the Supreme Lord, since He is the eternal maintainer of dharma, Çré
Gauräìga demonstrated the proper standard of Vaiëava-äcära. Falling like a rod to
the ground, He placed His head at the feet of Paramänanda Puré and his servant.

sa-sädhvasa puré präha / maiva karttum ihärhasi
tva eva jagatä nätho / jagac-caitanya-kärakaù 22
sa-sädhvasam - with consternation; puré - Paramänanda; präha - said; mä - not;
evam - thus; kartum - to do; iha - in this case; arhasi - You should; tvam - You;
eva - certainly; jagatäm - of the worlds; nätha - the Lord; jagat - in the universe;
caitanya - of consciousness; kärakaù - the causer.
Much alarmed, Çré Puré said, "Lord, it is not proper for You to act in this way, for
You are the supreme master of all worlds. Indeed, You are the originally cause of
consciousness within them.

jïäto 'si bhagavän säkät / çré-këa-bhakta-rüpa-dhk
çré-rädhä-bhävam äpanno / mädhuryya-rasa-lampaöaù 23
jïäta - it is known; asi - You are; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; säkät - in

[p.492]
Person; çré-këa-bhakta - of a devotee of Çré Kåñëa; rüpa-dhk - accepting the form;
çré-rädhä-bhävam - the mood of Rädhä; äpanna - accepted; mädhurya-rasa - the
conjugal mellow; lampaöaù - plunderer.
"It is known through the evidence of çästra that You are directly Bhagavän Çré
Kåñëa, the Supreme Lord. You have accepted the role of Your own bhakta in order to
relish Çré Rädhä-bhäva, and thus You engage in plundering the mellows of mädhuryarasa."

çrutvä tad-vacana këaù / prahasan präha sädaram
premnä te baddha-hdaya / mä jänéhi na saçayaù 24
çrutvä - hearing; tat-vacanam - his words; këaù - the all-attractive; prahasan laughing; präha - said; sädaram - with respect; premnä - by love; te - to you;
baddha-hdayam - bound in My heart; mäm - Me; jänéhi - know; na - no; saçayaù doubt.
Hearing Çré Puré-päda's words, Çré Kåñëa laughed and with great respect He said,
"Because of your loving sentiments, you should know that My heart is also forever
bound in love to you. Have no doubt of this.

gaccha ketra mahä-ramya / yävac cäha samävraje
tävad eva bhavän tiöhatv / evam uktvä yayau hariù 25
gaccha - go; ketram - to Jagannätha Puré; mahä-ramyam - very delightful; yävat
- until; ca - and; aham - I; samävraje - I return; tävat - then; eva - surely; bhavän your grace; tiöhatu - must stay; evam - thus; uktvä - saying; yayau - He went;
hariù - the remover of sin.
"Your grace, kindly go now to Çré Kñetra for it is very pleasing for bhakti-sädhana
and take up your residence there until I return." So saying, Çré Gaura Hari departed
on the path.

Thus ends the Fifteenth Sarga entitled "Gaura Hari's Joyous Meeting with Çré

[p.493]
Paramänanda Puré," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Sixteenth Sarga
çré-jagannätha-darçana
Darçana of Lord Jagannätha

eva vrajan vipra pathi pravéëän / tamäla-vkän jagad-eka-bandhuù
dövä hasan dhäraëam eva ktvä / sasparçanenäpi samuddadhära 1
evam - thus; vrajan - going; vipra - O learned brähmaëa; pathi - on the path;
pravéëän - ancient; tamäla-vkän - trees of deep blue color like Kåñëa; jagat-ekabandhuù - the only friend of the worlds; dövä - seeing; hasan - laughing;
dhäraëam - holding; eva - indeed; ktvä - having done; sasparçanena - by the
touch; api - indeed; samuddadhära - completely liberated.
O learned brähmaëa, as the sole friend of all the worlds travelled on the path, He
saw some ancient tamäla trees, and laughing, He embraced them. By the mere touch
of His hands, He delivered those trees from material bondage.

tadaiva te sapta-gandharvva-rüpäs / tad-darçanänanda-samudramagnäù
hitvä sva-päpa muni-çäpa-ja prabhu / natvä yayus te nija-çäsana
çubham 2
tadä - then; eva - indeed; te - they; sapta-gandharva-rüpä - the form of seven
gandharvas (celestial musicians); tat-darçana - seeing Him; änanda-samudra the ocean of bliss; magnäù - immersed; hitvä - giving up; sva-päpam - their sins;

[p.494]
muni-çäpa-jam - born of the curse of a sage; prabhum - to the Master; natvä having bowed down; yayu - they left; te - they; nija-çäsanam - their domain;
çubham - splendid.
Then those trees assumed their original forms of seven gandharvas and seeing Çré
Këa Caitanya, they became immersed in an ocean of transcendental happiness.
relinquishing the sinful reaction which had been brought upon them by the curse of
a sage, they offered obeisances before the Lord and departed for their own dazzling
domain.

tataù para këa-rasäbhimattaù / säkät para brahma japan
çubhäkaram
çré-räma govinda hare muräre / janärdana çré-dhara väsudeva 3
tataù param - thereafter; këa-rasa - the mellows of Kåñëa; abhimattaù - highly
intoxicated; säkät - directly; param brahma - Supreme Spirit; japan - chanting;
çubha-akaram - auspicious vibrations; çré-räma - O Çré Räma; govinda - O
Govinda; hare - O Hari; mura-are - O enemy of the Murä demon; janärdana - O
Janärdana; çré-dhara - O maintainer of the goddess of fortune; väsudeva - O allpervading son of Vasudeva.
Thereafter being intoxicated by Çré Kåñëa-rasa,the Supreme Brahma chanted these
names of the Lord, which are auspicious combinations of transcendental sound: "Çré
Räma! Govinda! Hare! Muräri! Janärdana! Çrédhara! Väsudeva!

sva-bhakta-rakäkara räghavendra / sétä-pate lakmaëa-präëa-nätha
sugréva-hd bäli-vadhäti-duùkha / marut-sutänanda-da rävaëäre 4
sva-bhakta-raka-äkara - O best of the protectors of Your devotees; räghavaindra - O best of the descendants of Raghu; sétä-pate - O husband of Sétä;
lakmaëa-präëa-nätha - O Lord of the life-breath of Lakñmaëa; sugréva-ht - O
You who dwell in the heart of Sugréva; bäli-vadha-ati-duùkha - O You who are
greatly aggrieved at the death of Bäli; marut-suta-änanda-da - O bestower of joy
to the son of the wind-god; rävaëa-are - O enemy of Rävaëa.

[p.495]
"Sva-bhakta-rakäkara! Räghavendra! Sétä-pati! Lakmaëa-präëa-nätha! Sugréva-ht!
Bäli-vadhäti-duùkha! Marut-sutänanda-da! Rävaëäri!"

ity ädi-nämämta-päna-mattaù / çré-setu-bandha parivrajya satvaram
dadarça rämeçvara-liìgam adbhuta / çré-çaìkara-preöhatamaù sadä
hariù 5
iti - thus; ädi - so forth; näma-amta - names of nectar; päna - drinking; mattaù delighted; çré-setu-bandham - the bridge to Çré Laìkä; parivrajya circumambulating; sa-tvaram - quickly; dadarça - He saw; rämeçvara-liìgam the sacred phallus of Çiva, meaning the Lord of Räma; adbhutam - wonderful; çréçaìkara - Lord Çiva; preöhatamaù - the most dear; sadä - always; hariù - the
remover of sin.
Thus intoxicated by quaffing the ambrosia distilled from these and many other
names of Bhagavän, Çré Hari swiftly circumambulated Çré Setu-Bandha, where Lord
Räma with His monkey army built the bridge to Çré Laìkä. There He saw the
wonderful Rämeçvara-liìgam which was worshipped by Lord Räma for that purpose.
Certainly Çaìkara is forever very dear to Çré Hari.

natvä prabhum aïjalim eva baddhäd / dtvä ca gauré-rasa-da sadäçivam
nanartta sarvveçvara eva tatra / bhävena gä sannamayan pade pade
6
natvä - having bowed; prabhum - to the Master; aïjalim - hands hallowed in
supplication; eva - indeed; baddhät - joined; dövä - seeing; ca - and; gauré - to
Gauré; rasa-dam - the giver of rasa; sadä-çivam - the eternal form of Çiva; nanarta
- He danced; sarva-éçvara - the controller of everything; eva - indeed; tatra there; bhävena - by His ecstacy; gäm - the earth; sannamayan - bowing down;
pade pade - at every step.

[p.496]
The Lord of all lords, Çré Gaura Prabhu bowed down before Sadä Çiva with His
hands folded in supplication. Gazing upon he who bestows the science of rasa on
goddess Gauré, He danced at that spot, and the earth bowed down at every step.

paçyanti sarvve jagad-eka-bandhu / çré-gaura-candra svarasäbhimattam
babhüvur atyanta-suvismayä dhruva / tän vaïcayitvä khalu sa tiro
'bhavat 7
paçyanti - they look; sarve - all; jagat-eka-bandhum - at the only friend of the
world; çré-gaura-candram - the golden moon-like Lord; sva-rasa-abhimattam intoxicated by His own mellow; babhüvu - they were; atyanta - unlimited;
suvismayä - very astonished; dhruvam - factually; tän - them; vaïcayitvä tricking; khalu - verily; sa - He; tira abhavat - He disappeared.
All the people gazed in unlimitedly astonished at Çré Gaura Candra, the only friend
of the all worlds, who was blissfully entranced, relishing the rasa of His own
confidential identity of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa. Then creating an illusion, the Lord
disappeared from their vision.

sarvväëi térthäné krameëa dövä / punaù parävtya kpämbudhiù
prabhuù
çrémaj-jagannätha-didkayä bhça / çré-ketra-räja gamayäï cakära 8
sarväëi - all; térthäné - sacred places; krameëa - gradually; dövä - having seen;
punaù - again; parävtya - returning; kpä-ambudhiù - ocean of mercy; prabhuù the Master; çrémat-jagannätha - the splendid Lord of the universe; didkayä because of desiring to see; bhçam - intensely; çré-ketra-räjam - the king of holy
lands; gamayäm cakära - departed.
Having seen all the holy térthas one after another, our Prabhu, who is like a vast
ocean of compassion, felt an intense yearning to see Jagannätha Svämé, and thus He

[p.497]
returned His steps towards the holy king of kñetras.

godävaré-téram anu svaya prabhur / ägatya tatra sthita eva sadgatiù
çré-räma-räyena punaù su-püjito / babhau rasa-jïena dvija-ghe
sukhé 9
godävaré-téram - the bank of the river Godävaré; anu - following; svayam spontaneously; prabhu - the Master; ägatya - coming; tatra - there; sthita staying; eva - only; sat-gatiù - the goal of life for saintly people; çré-räma-räyena with Çré Räma Räya; punaù - again; su-püjita - nicely honored; babhau - he
shone; rasa-jïena - with that sage of rasa; dvija-ghe - in the house of the
brähmaëa; sukhé - happily.
Following the bank of the Godävaré river, Gaura Prabhu, who is the sole meaning
in life for the saintly men of this age, by His heart-felt desire came to stay again with
Çré Rämänanda Räya. Seated in the home of that best amongst the twice-born, the
son of Çacé shone in jubilation as that sage of rasa nicely againhonored Him.

rätrau para tértha-kathäù prajalpan / çré-rädhikä-këarasänumoditaù
äjïäpya çighra ca çré-padma-locana / draöu sadaivärhasi näpara
sukham 10
rätrau - at night; param - later; tértha-kathäù - tales of the holy places;
prajalpan - talking; çré-rädhikä-këa-rasa - the mellows of Çré Rädhikä-Kåñëa;
anumoditaù - delighted; äjïäpya - ordering; çighram - swiftly; çré-padma-locanam
- the lotus-eyed Jagannätha; draöum - to see; sadä - always; eva - surely; arhasi you ought to; na - no; aparam - other; sukham - happiness.
Later that night, after discussing the Lord's journeys to the térthas, they relished
the rasa-tattva of Çré-Rädhikä-Kåñëa. Then the Lord ordered Rämänanda, "You must
come soon to see the lotus-eyed Jagannätha, for there exists no higher pleasure than

[p.498]
His darçana."

eva niçä sä rasikendra-maulinä / çré-gaura-candreëa räyeëa
särddham
nétä kaëa-präyam atéva darçanät / punaù svaya gantu-manä
babhüva ha 11
evam - thus; niçä - night; sä - that; rasika-indra - king among masters of rasa;
maulinä - by the crest-jewel; çré-gaura-candreëa - with the splendid Golden
Moon; räyeëa - with the governor; särdham - in company; nétä - passed; kaëapräyam - like a moment; atéva - intense; darçanät - in order to see; punaù - again;
svayam - spontaneously; gantu-manä - mind to go; babhüva - He was; ha indeed.
Thus the crest-jewel among rasikas, resembling the splendid golden full moon,
spent that night in Këä-kathä with Räya Rämänanda, and it passed away like an
instant. Then the Lord again felt an intense hankering to see Jagannätha Svämé, and
He immediately resolved to go to Him.

çré-viëu-däsena dvijena särddham / älälanätha sa janärddana
prabhuù
dövä praëamya nivasan kiyad dinam / äyäti sarvveçvara-nélakandaram 12
çré-viëu-däsena - by Viñëudäsa; dvijena - by the brähmaëa; särdham accompanied; älälanätham - the Deity of _lälanätha; sa - He; jana-ardanam who thrills the hearts of people; prabhuù - the Master; dövä - having seen;
praëamya - offering obeisances; nivasan - staying; kiyat - so much; dinam - day;
äyäti - he goes; sarva-éçvara - the controller of everything; néla-kandaram - the
blue mountain (the temple of Jagannätha).
Mahäprabhu travelled in the company of a brähmaëa named Viñëudäsa and saw
_lälanätha Janärdana. He offered obeisances and resided there a few days. Then He

[p.499]
went on to Néläcala, the blue mountain, home of the Supreme Lord.

çré-käçénäthasya ghe sthito hariù / çré-särvvabhaumädibhir anvitaù
svayam
çrémaj-jagannätha-didkayä yayau / prakälya pädau çré-ratnamandiram 13
çré-käçénäthasya - of Çré Käçénätha; ghe - in the home; sthita - stayed; hariù the remover of sin; çré-särvabhauma-ädibhi - with Särvabhauma and the others;
anvitaù - together; svayam - spontaneously; çrémat-jagannätha - the splendid
Lord of the universe; didkayä - because of desiring to see; yayau - He went;
prakälya - after washing; pädau - His feet; çré-ratna-mandiram - to the beautiful
jewel temple.
Again Çré Gaura Hari stayed in the house of Käçénätha, and there He met with
Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya and the other bhaktas. His heart naturally yearned for the
sight of Lord Jagannätha, and so after first bathing His feet, He entered the
splendrous jewel-temple.

çré-garuòa-stambha-samästhitaù çré- / këaù svaya bhakti-rasena
pürnaù
dadarça sarvveçvaram éçvara para / brahma svaya sägra-jam eva çrépatiù 14
çré-garuòa-stambha - the pillar of Garua; samästhitaù - standing; çré-këaù - who
stops the repetition of birth and death; svayam - from the heart of His heart;
bhakti-rasena - by devotional mellows; pürnaù - filled; dadarça - He saw; sarvaéçvara - the Master of all; éçvaram - the Supreme Controller; param brahma - the
Supreme Brahman; svayam - original; sa-agra-jam - with His elder brother; eva truly; çré-patiù - the husband of Lakñmé.
As Gaura Kåñëa, the Lord of Lakñmé, stood by the pillar named Garuòa Stambha,
overwhelmed with bhakti-rasa, He gazed from the heart of His heart upon the

[p.500]
controller of all controllers, the Supreme Lord, the original and ultimate reality,
who was accompanied by His elder brother, Çré Balabhadra.

pärçva-dvaye çyämala-gaura-sundarau / paçyanti bhaktäù sukhasindhu-magnäù
na tptim äpuù kpaëä dhana yathä / sampräpya kuträpi na vaktum
éçire 15
pärçva-dvaye - on the two sides; çyämala - blackish; gaura-sundarau - beautiful
golden; paçyanti - they see; bhaktäù - the devotees; sukha-sindhu - in the ocean
of happiness; magnäù - merged; na - not; tptim - satiation; äpuù - they attained;
kpaëä - a miser; dhanam - wealth; yathä - as; sampräpya - getting; kutra api anything else; na - not; vaktum - to speak; éçire - they are able.
When Gaura's devotees saw on either side of the altar those two beautiful black
and golden forms, Çyämala-sundara and Gaura-sundara, they became merged in an
ocean of bliss, in which they found no point of satiation. They were just like misers
who acquire wealth and become unable to speak of anything else.

paçyan çré-bhakta-vargaiù sakala-rasa-gurur gaura-premni
nimagno
nityänandäkhyo rämo rasa-maya-vapuau çyäma-gauräìga-rüpau

huìkäraiù siha-nädair jaya-jaya-dhvanibhis taëdavair apy abhékëa
sarvveä prema-dätä jayati sa gadädhäriëo darça-pürëaù 16

paçyan - seeing; çré-bhakta-vargaiù - with the assembly of devotees; sakalarasa - of all mellows; guru - the spiritual preceptor; gaura-premni - in the love of
Gaura; nimagna - immersed; nityänanda-äkhya räma - named Nityänanda Räma;
rasa-maya - mellifluous; vapuau - two bodies; çyäma-gauräìga-rüpau - black and
gold forms; huìkäraiù - with roars; siha-nädai - with sounds of the lion; jayajaya-dhvanibhi - with sounds of "jaya! jaya!," victory; taëdavai - with ecstatic
dancing; api - really; abhékëam - incessant; sarveäm - of all of them; prema-dätä the donor of love; jayati - glory be; sa - He; gadädhäriëa - of Gadädhara; darça-

[p.501]
pürëaù - fulfilled eyes.
Çré Nityänanda Räma, the guru of all rasa, His mind immersed in Gaura-prema,
gazed with the other bhaktas upon the two black and golden forms of rasa, and
roared incessantly like a lion as He danced in great ecstacy and shouted, "Jaya! Jaya!
All glories to that person who grants love to one and all! All glories to the Lord
whose vision fills full the eyes of Gadädhara!"

tadaiva çré-këa-samäjïayä sudhér / mmälya samädäya tulasévimiçrakam
çré-gaura-candräya sa bhakta-mänine / sa-bhakta-vargäya dadau
mahä-matiù 17
tadä - then; eva - verily; çré-këa-samäjïayä - by the order of Lord Jagannätha;
su-dhé - the highly intelligent priest; mälyam - garland; samädäya - presenting;
tulasé-vimiçrakam - interwoven with tulasé leaves; çré-gaura-candräya - unto the
golden-moon-like Lord; sa - He; bhakta-mänine - unto one who honors His
devotee; sa-bhakta-vargäya - to the assembly of devotees; dadau - he gave; mahämatiù - very intelligent.
Lord Çré Gaura Candra who loves to give honor His bhaktas, was standing in the
assembly of His bhaktas. Suddenly by the order of Çré Jagannätha, the püjäré who
was highly discerning and intelligent, presented to Him Lord Jagannätha's prasädam
garland which was entwined with tulasé leaves.

prasäda-mälä jagad-éçvarasya / premäçru-pürëa kila loka-pävana
sa-bhakta-varga pulakäkulävåto / jagräha mürddhnä praëaman
svaya hari 18
prasäda - sign of grace; mäläm - the garland; jagat-éçvarasya - of the Lord of
the universe; prema-açru - tears of love; pürëa - filled; kila - indeed; loka-pävana the savior of mankind; sa-bhakta-varga - with the assembly of devotees; pulaka thrill-bumps; äkula - eagerly; ävåta - covered; jagräha - took; mürdhnä - upon

[p.502]
His head; praëaman - bowing flat; svayam - spontaneously; hari - the remover of
sin.
Çré Hari who had appeared to deliver fallen souls, His eyes brimming with tears of
prema and His body covered by pulakas, placed the prasäda-mälä of Çré Jagadéçvara
upon His own head and fell to the ground and bowed before Him.

Thus ends the Sixteenth Sarga entitled "Darçana of Lord Jagannätha," in the
Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Seventeenth Sarga
devänanda-anugrahaù
The Lord Shows Mercy to Devänanda Paëita

ekadä bhagavän këo / bhakta-varga-samanvitaù
proväca mathurä yämi / bhavadbhir anumoditaù 1
ekadä - once; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; këa - the all-attractive; bhaktavarga - the assembly of devotees; samanvitaù - together with; proväca - He said;
mathuräm - to the birth-place of Kåñëa; yämi - I am going; bhavadbhi - by your
honors; anumoditaù - approved.
One day, when the all-opulent Lord Çré Kåñëa was in the presence of His bhaktas,
He said, "If you gentlemen agree, I shall now depart for Mathurä."

ücus te duùkha-santaptä / baddhäïjalim avasthitäù
katha ke tyaktum icchanti / pada te 'mburuhekaëa 2

[p.503]
ücu - they said; te - they; duùkha-santaptä - burning with grief; baddha-aïjalim with folded hands; avasthitäù - stood; katham - how?; ke - who?; tyaktum - to
give up; icchanti - desire; padam - feet; te - Your; ambu-ruha-ékaëa - O lotus-eyed
one.
Burning by distress, the bhaktas stood near Him with folded hands and said, "O
lotus-eyed one, how could anyone desire to give up the shelter of Your feet?

yatas tva tatra tértha / cäkhila vndävana madhu
äsén mürti-dhara pärçve / tava sevä-päräyaëam 3
yata - where; tvam - You; tatra - that place; tértham - the holy places; ca - and;
akhilam - all; vndävanam - the forest of tulasé; madhu - Madhupuri; äsét - there
was; mürti-dharam - personified; pärçve - at the side; tava - Your; seväpäräyaëam - eager to do service.
"Besides, wherever Your Lordship is, there Våndävana, Madhupuri, and all the
personified holy places certainly stand by Your side, eager to render service.

lélä-sukha-vinodäya / yäsyasi mathurä prabho
tathäpi tän samuddharttu / trätum arhasi duùkhitän 4
lélä-sukha-vinodäya - to enjoy pleasure-pastimes; yäsyasi - You shall go;
mathuräm - to Kåñëa's eternal birth-place; prabho - O Master; tathäpi - still; tän those; samuddhartum - to uplift; trätum - to protect; arhasi - You ought;
duùkhitän - the unhappy.
"O Prabhu, You are journeying to Mathurä to enjoy pleasure-pastimes. However,
You should also protect and uplift Your servants, who are now afflicted by grief."

äyäsye çéghram eveti / tän säntvayya dayä-nidhiù
gacchan gaìgä-darçanäya / väcaspati-gha prati 5

[p.504]
äyäsye - I shall return; çéghram - soon; eva - certainly; iti - thus; tän - them;
säntvaya - conciliating; dayä-nidhiù - the ocean of mercy; gacchan - going; gaìgädarçanäya - to see the Gaìgä; väcaspati-gham - the house of Väcaspati; prati towards.
The ocean of compassion consoled them, "Before long I shall surely return." Then
He departed for the house of Väcaspati in order to take darçana of Gaìgä.

nsihänandas tat çrutvä / manasi paricintayan
jaìghälän dätum ärabdhaù / keträn madhupurävadhi 6
svarëa-raupya-pravälädyair / maëi-ratna-gaëädibhiù
sükma-sükma-céna-västrair / nirvntaiù pupa-räjibhiù 7
nsihänanda - Nåsihänanda Brahmacäré; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; manasi - in
his mind; paricintayan - meditating; jaìghälän - a path; dätum - to give;
ärabdhaù - began; keträö - from Puré; madhupura - Mathurä; avadhi - as far as;
svarëa - gold; raupya - silver; praväla - coral; ädyai - and so on; maëi - pearls;
ratna-gaëa - jewels; ädibhiù - and so on; sükma-sükma - very fine; céna-västrai with silk cloths; nirvntaiù - without stems; pupa-räjibhiù - with festoons of
flowers.
When Nåsihänanda Brahmacäré heard news of the Lord's departure, he meditated
on the route of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu. Thus he mentally decorated the pathway
from Jagannätha Puré all the way to Madhupuri with gold, silver, coral, pearls,
jewels, very fine silken cloth, and festoons of choice flowers without stems.

jaläçayeu jala-jaiù / padma-nélotpalädibhiù
çobhita ratna-ghaööaiç ca / hasa-jai jala-kukkuöaiù 8
jala-äçayeu - in ponds of water; jala-jaiù - with fish; padma - lotuses; nélautpala-ädibhiù - headed by the blue lotus; çobhitam - beautified; ratna-ghaööai with jeweled steps; ca - and; hasa-jai - with cygnets; jala-kukkuöaiù - with

[p.505]
waterfowl.
He also constructed ponds of clear water, by the pathway, wherein multicolored
fish swam, and which were beautified by many kinds of lotus flowers headed by the
blue lotus, and also by young swans and variegated waterfowl. Jewelled steps gave
access to the water of these ponds.

eva krameëa sannéya / näöya-sthalam api dvijaù
älekhya vana-lélä tä / smaran këasya vikramam 9
evam - thus; krameëa - gradually; sannéya - bringing; näöya-sthalam - to the
town Känäi Naöaçälä; api - indeed; dvijaù - the brähmaëa; älekhya - designed;
vana-léläm - forest pastimes; täm - that; smaran - remembering; këasya - of
Kåñëa; vikramam - prowess.
Thus, that brähmaëa gradually constructed the road in his mind up to the town of
Känäi Naöaçälä. There he created scenes for Çré Kåñëa's forest pastimes while
remembering the heroic qualities of the Lord.

prabhor api sva-bhaktänä / paka-pätitvam eva ca
sukhé-bhütvä hasan ntyan / präha bhakta-janägrataù 10
prabho - of the Master; api - verily; sva-bhaktänäm - of His devotees; päkapätitvam - favoring the side; eva - indeed; ca - and; sukhé-bhütvä - becoming
happy; hasan - laughing; ntyan - dancing; präha - he said; bhakta-jana-agrataù in the presence of the devotees.
Nåsihänanda became happy while thinking of Mahäprabhu's special kindness to
those who accept His shelter. Then laughing and dancing, he declared in the
presence of all the devotees:

adhunä na gamiyati / mathurä bhagavän prati
äyäsyatéti jänantu / këa-näöya-sthaläd api 11

[p.506]
adhunä - presently; na - not; gamiyati - He will go; mathuräm - to the birthplace of Kåñëa; bhagavän - the illustrious Lord; prati - to; äyäsyati - He will
return; iti - thus; jänantu - you should know; këa-näöya-sthalät - from Kåñëa's
dancing pavilion; api - just.
"For the present Bhagavän Çré Caitanya will not reach Mathurä. Your graces
should know that He will return here just after reaching a certain dancing pavilion
prepared for Çré Kåñëa (at the town of Känäi Naöaçälä)."

çrutvä bhakta-gaëäù sarvve / tad-väkyam amta çubham
pibantas ta parikramya / daëòavat patitä bhuvi 12
çrutvä - hearing; bhakta-gaëäù - the group of devotees; sarve - all; tat-väkyam his words; amtam - immortal; çubham - auspicious; pibanta - drinking; tam him; parikramya - circumambulating; daëòa-vat - like rods; patitä - falling; bhuvi
- on the earth.
All the bhaktas drank these welcome words through their ears like nectar. Then
they circumambulated Nåsihänanda and fell before him like rods on the earth.

so 'namat prema-pürëätmä / samäliìgya parasparam
präptäs tad-darçana-sukha / babhüvur ati-haritäù 13
sa - he; anamat - bowed down; prema-pürëa-ätmä - a soul filled with love;
samäliìgya - embracing; parasparam - one another; präptä - having obtained; tatdarçana-sukham - the happiness of His association; babhüvu - they were; atiharitäù - very jubilant.
Nåsihänanda, his heart completely overflowing with Gaura-prema, also prostrated
himself before them. All of them embraced one another, and at that moment they
felt the happiness of seeing Gauräìga and became profoundly jubilant.

tato jagan-maìgalam acyutaù svaya / çré-këa-saìkérttanam eva ktvä

[p.507]
väcaspater brähmaëa-sattamasya / grùa saméyät sva-janaiù parétaù
14
tata - at that time; jagat-maìgalam - auspicious for the worlds; acyutaù - the
infallible Lord; svayam - Himself; çré-këa-saìkértanam - congregational chanting
of Çré Kåñëa's names; eva - indeed; ktvä - having done; väcaspate - of Väcaspati;
brähmaëa-sattamasya - of the purest of brähmaëas; grùam - home; saméyät - He
went; sva-janaiù - by His men; parétaù - surrounded.
Meanwhile, the infallible Lord Himself surrounded by His own men, was
performing all auspicious Kåñëa-saìkértana, had just reached the house of the pure
brähmaëa, Väcaspati.

çréman-navadvépa-niväsino ye / 'pare janä ye sura-loka-väsinaù
mürttyä su-dövä mukha-paìkaja prabhor / väïchanti te netra-çata hi
sarvvataù 15
çrémat-navadvépa - glorious Navadvépa; niväsina - the residents; ye - who;
apare - other; janä - people; ye - who; sura-loka-väsinaù - residents of the
heavenly planets; mürtyä - by the form; su-dövä - nicely seen; mukha-paìkajam the lotus face; prabho - of the Master; väïchanti - they desire; te - they; netraçatam - hundreds of eyes; hi - indeed; sarvataù - on all sides.
When the Navadvépa-väsés along with others, who were actually residents of the
heavenly planets, received the refreshing glimpse of Gaura Prabhu's lotus face, they
then desired to have hundreds of eyes on all sides of their bodies with which to
behold Him.

dina katipaya këa / uitvä dvija-mandire
uddadhära jana sarvva / jaòäëdha-badirädikam 16
dinam - days; katipaya - a few; këa - Kåñëa Caitanya; uitvä - residing; dvijamandire - in the home of that brähmaëa; uddadhära - He delivered; janam -

[p.508]
people; sarvam - all; jaòa - dull; aëdha - blind; badira - deaf; ädikam - and so on.
While Çré Kåñëa dwelt for a few days in the home of that brähmaëa, He delivered
all of the people there, including the foolish, the blind, the deaf and so on.

vakreçvara-kpä-pätro / devänandaù su-paëòitaù
ägatya prabhu-päde ca / nivedya pürvva-durmmitam 17
vakreçvara - of Vakreçvara; kpä - of the mercy; pätra - the recipient;
devänandaù - the associate of Gauräìga; su-paëòitaù - the excellent scholar;
ägatya - coming; prabhu-päde - at the feet of Prabhu; ca - and; nivedya - offering;
pürva-durmitam - former envy.
The excellent scholar Devänanda, who had become a recipient of Vakreçvara
Paëita's mercy, approached Gaura Prabhu's feet and confessed his former envy.

papraccha nija-hita ca / tasmai präha kåpä-nidhiù
çrémad-bhägavata säkät / sac-cid-änanda-vigraham 18
çré-kåñëam eva jänéhi / mätsaryädi-vivarjjitam
paöhan bhakti-rasäsvädam / präptänando bhaviyati 19
papraccha - he inquired; nija-hitam - concerning his own welfare; ca - and;
tasmai - to him; präha - He said; dayä-nidhiù - the ocean of mercy; çrématbhägavatam - the spotless Puräëa; säkät - directly; sat-cit-änanda - of eternity,
knowledge and bliss; vigraham - form; çré-kåñëam - who puts an end to birth
and death; eva - factually; jänéhi - you must understand; mätsarya - envy; ädi and so on; vivarjitam - devoid; paöhan - reciting; bhakti-rasa - the taste of
devotional service; äsvädam - relish; präpta - achieve; änanda - bliss; bhaviyati there will be.
Then he inquired what he ought to do for his spiritual self-interest. The jewel of
compassion replied, "You must understand that Çrémad Bhägavatam is directly the

[p.509]
sac-cid-änanda form of Çré Kåñëa. If you recite it with this consciousness, free from
envy and other base qualities, you will then become able to relish bhakti-rasa and
awaken your spiritual nature of bliss."

çrutvä vipro naman mürddhnä / tat-päda-rajasävtaù
gaura-candra-rase magno / nanartta paramädbhutam 20
çrutvä - hearing; vipra - the learned brähmaëa; naman - bowing; mürdhnä with the head; tat-päda-rajasä - by the dust; ävtaù - covered; gaura-candra-rase in the mellow of Gaura Candra; magnä - immersed; nanarta - he danced; paramaadbhutam - extremely astonishingly.
Hearing this, the vipra bowed his head and covered it with the dust from the Lord's
feet. Then immersed in the rasa of Çré Gaura Candra, he danced in a very
astonishing manner.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Sarga entitled "The Lord Shows Mercy to
Devänanda Paëita," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Eighteenth Sarga
çré-gopénätha-darçanam
Caitanya Deva Beholds Lord Gopénätha

tato bhaktair vtaù këo / räma-keli jagäma ha
çrutvä taträgamad draöu / prabhu-päda sanätanaù 1
tata - then; bhaktai - with the devotees; vtaù - surrounded; këa - Çré Kåñëa

[p.510]
Caitanya; räma-kelim - the town of Räma-keli; jagäma - He went; ha - indeed;
çrutvä - hearing; tatra - there; agamat - He came; draöum - to see; prabhu-pädam the feet of the Master; sanätanaù - Sanätana Gosvämé.
Then surrounded by the bhaktas, Çré Kåñëa went to the town of Rämakeli. When
Sanätana heard of this, he came to see the feet of Mahäprabhu.

prabhu dövä préta-manäù / prapatan dharaëé-tale
daçanägre tëa dhtvä / sänuja präha keçavam 2
prabhum - the Master; dövä - seeing; préta-manäù - joyous heart; prapatan - fell
flat; dharaëé-tale - on the earth floor; daçana-agre - between his teeth; tëam grass; dhtvä - holding; sa-anuja - with his younger brother; präha - he said;
keçavam - to the Lord who has beautiful hair.
Seeing the Lord, his heart became much engladdened. Sanätana and his younger
brother, Rüpa, fell to the earth before Mahäprabhu, holding grass in their teeth, and
they addressed Gaura Keçava:

mad-vidho nästi päpätmä / näparädhé ca kaçcana
parihäre 'pi lajjä me / ki bruve puruottama 3
mat-vidha - of my category; na asti - there is not; päpa-ätmä - a sinful soul; na not; aparädhé - offender; ca - and; kaçcana - anyone; parihäre - having given up;
api - even; lajjä - shame; me - my; kim - what?; bruve - I say; purua-uttama - O
best of persons.
"There is nowhere a sinful person nor such an offender as us. And although I have
now abandoned all shame to speak to You, still what have I that is worth saying, O
best of persons?"

sva-päda tasya çirasi / dhtvä präha janärddanaù
vndävana-niväsé tva / satya satya na saçayaù 4

[p.511]
sva-pädam - His foot; tasya - his; çirasi - on the head; dhtvä - holding; präha He said; jana-ardanaù - who inspires the hearts of mankind; vndävana-niväsé resident of Våndävana; tvam - you; satyam satyam - the unequivocal truth; na not; saçayaù - doubt.
Lord Janärdana placed His own foot upon Sanätana's head and declared, "Truly!
Truly! Without doubt, you are a resident of Våndävana!

mathurä gantum icchämi / tvayä särddha yathä-sukham
lupta-térthasya präkaöya / tathä vndävanasya ca 5
mathuräm - Kåñëa's birth-place; gantum - to go; icchämi - I desire; tvayä - with
you; särdham - in company; yathä-sukham - if it pleases you; lupta-térthasya - of
the lost holy places; präkaöyam - revealing; tathä - so; vndävanasya - of
Våndävana; ca - and.
"If you wish, I shall go with you to Mathurä Maëala, to reveal the lost térthas of
Mathurä and Våndävana.

karttum arhasi tat sarvva / mat-kpäto bhaviyati
bhakti-svarüpiëé säkät / prema-bhakti-pradäyiné 6
kartum - to do; arhasi - you ought; tat - that; sarvam - all; mat-kpäta - by my
mercy; bhaviyati - it shall be; bhakti-svarüpiëé - the original form of devotion;
säkät - in person; prema-bhakti - devotional love of God; pradäyiné - bestowing.
"It is your duty to accomplish all of this. Certainly by My mercy it will come to
pass, for that mercy is devotional service personified, the bestower of premabhakti."

çrutvä präha mahä-buddhiù / sänujaù çré-sanätanaù
ärämaù këa-candrasya / ramya vndävana çubham 7

[p.512]
çrutvä - hearing; präha - he said; mahä-buddhiù - highly intelligent; sa-anujaù with his younger brother, Rüpa Gosvämé; çré-sanätanaù - Sanätana Gosvämé;
ärämaù - pleasure garden; këa-candrasya - of the moon-like Lord Kåñëa; vndävanam - the forest of Våndä; çubham - sublime.
After hearing this, the highly intelligent Sanätana and his younger brother then
said, "Våndävana is the pleasure garden of Çré Kåñëa Candra. It is delightful and
sublime.

çré-rädhayä saha këo / yatra kréòati sarvvadä
agamya yogibhir nitya / deva-siddhair naretaraiù 8
çré-rädhayä - by Çré Rädhä; saha - accompanied; këa - the all-attractive; yatra where; kréòati - sports; sarvadä - eternally; agamyam - unattainable; yogibhi - by
the yogés; nityam - forever; deva-siddhai - by divinities and perfect beings; naraitaraiù - by men and others.
"Çré Rädhä and Kåñëa forever sport there. That place is unattainable even by yogés,
devas, perfected beings, men and others.

nirjjana taj-janädyaiç ca / gatvä ki syät sukhäya ca
tvat-kpä-çastra-rüpeëa / chittvä me dha-çìkhaläm 9
räja-päträdi-rüpä ca / präpayya nija-sannidhim
çakti-saïcäraëa krövä / kuru këa yathä-sukham 10
nirjanam - solitary; tat-jana - your followers; ädyai - and with others; ca - and;
gatvä - going; kim - what?; syät - it may be; sukhäya - for happiness; ca - and;
tvat-kpä - Your mercy; çastra-rüpeëa - in the form of a weapon; chittvä - having
cut; me - my; dha-çìkhaläm - strong shackles; räja-pätra - king's minister; ädi and so on; rüpäm - form; ca - and; präpayya - achieving; nija-sannidhim - own
presence; çakti - of energies; saïcäraëam - empowerment; krövä - doing; kuru -

[p.513]
do; këa - O Kåñëa; yathä-sukham - as it pleases You.
"Dear Lord, if You go to that solitary place in the company of so many followers,
what happiness will You feel there?
O Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, with the sword of Your mercy, You have cut the strong
shackles of my ministerial post and so forth which bound me to sasära. Now that I
have obtained Your direct association, if it pleases You, kindly empower me to fulfill
Your mission."

tad-väkyämtam eva hi / pétvä präha hasan prabhuù
bhavan-manoratha këaù / sadä püëa kariyati 11
tat - his; väkya-amtam - words of nectar; evam - thus; hi - indeed; pétvä having drunk; präha - He said; hasan - smiling; prabhuù - the Master; bhavat your grace; mana-ratham - desire; këaù - the all-attractive; sadä - always; püëam fulfill; kariyati - He will do.
After drinking the ambrosia of Çré Sanätana's words, Prabhu replied laughingly,
"Certainly Çré Kåñëa always satisfies every desire of His great bhaktas like your good
self."

eva ta parisantoya / këo näöya-sthala gataù
rajanyä cintayäm äsa / satyam ukta na saçayaù 12
sanätanena ktinä / tan-mukhena ca mädhavaù
mäm äha nirjjana satya / vndäraëya sudurlabham 13
evam - thus; tam - him; parisantoya - fully satisfying; këa - who puts an end to
birth and death; näöya-sthalam - to the dancing pavilion; gataù - went; rajanyäm at night; cintayäm äsa - He thought; satyam - the truth; uktam - said; na saçayaù without doubt; sanätanena - by Sanätana; ktinä - by the learned; tat-mukhena through his mouth; ca - and; mädhavaù - the personification of madhu, honey;
mäm - to me; äha - he said; nirjanam - solitary; satyam - true; vndä-araëyam - the
forest of Våndä; su-durlabham - most difficult to obtain.

[p.514]
After fully satisfying heart of Sanätana, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya then went to Känäi
Naöaçälä. That night He thought, "The statement of the learned Sanätana is
undoubtedly true. Lord Mädhava has spoken to Me through his mouth. Alas! Truly
the solitary forest of Våndä is very difficult to attain.

loka-saìghair gate nitya / duùkham eva na saçayaù
saìga tyaktä gamiyämi / dakiëa cädhunä vraje 14
loka-saìghai - with groups of people; gate - to have gone; nityam - always;
duùkham - unhappiness; eva - certainly; na - not; saçayaù - a doubt; saìgam groups; tyaktä - giving up; gamiyämi - I shall go; dakiëam - south; ca - and;
adhunä - now; vraje - I am going.
"Without doubt, it is always a source of botheration to travel with many people on
pilgrimage. Only after giving up this group of followers shall I go to Våndävana.
Presently I shall proceed southwards."

eva vicäryya bhagavän / sändränanda-rasätmakaù
prätar utthäya çré-kåñëo / nityänanda-samanvitaù 15
evam - thus; vicärya - considering; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; sändraänanda - of condensed bliss; rasa - mellow; ätmakaù - personification; präta early; utthäya - rising; çré-kåñëa - the all-attractive; nityänanda-samanvitaù accompanied by Nityänanda.
So considering, Bhagavän Çré Kåñëa, the embodiment of condensed änanda-rasa,
rose early that morning with Nityänanda.

advaitäcäryya-nilaya / jagäma sa-tvara mudä
tena sampüjitas tatra / sthito bhakta-sukha-pradaù 16
advaita-äcärya - the incarnation of a devotee; nilayam - to the abode; jagäma -

[p.515]
He went; sa-tvaram - with speed; mudä - joyously; tena - by Him; sampüjita nicely worshipped; tatra - there; sthita - staying; bhakta-sukha - of happiness;
pradaù - the bestower.
In a joyous mood, He travelled speedily to the abode of Advaitäcärya.
Engladdening that bhakta's heart, He rested there and was well honored by Him.

acyutenäpy avirata / kautukänanda-varddhanaù
parihäsa-rasämodé / hari-däsa-dayäparaù 17
acyutena - with Acyutänanda; api - very; aviratam - constantly; kautuka enthusiasm; änanda-vardhanaù - increasing joy; parihäsa - joking; rasa-amodé enjoying the mellows; hari-däsa - to Haridäsa; dayä-aparaù - unsurpassed
mercy.
The Lord expanded ceaselessly in blissful eagerness, delighting in joking mellows
with Advaita's son, Acyutänanda. He also showed incomparable mercy to häkura
Haridäsa.

hari-saìkérttana rätrau / kurvvan sa bhakta-veöitaù
nanartta parama-préto / nityänanda-samanvitaù 18
hari - of Hari's names; saìkértanam - congregational chanting; rätrau - at
night; kurvan - making; sa - He; bhakta-veöitaù - surrounded by devotees;
nanarta - He danced; parama-préta - supreme love; nityänanda-samanvitaù - with
Nityänanda.
At night, surrounded by His devotees, He performed hari-näma-saìkértana, dancing
with Nityänanda in the spirit of parama-prema.

mätara bhakta-vnda ca / mät-bhakta-çiromaëiù
navadvépät samänayya / tad-duùkha parimocayan 19

[p.516]
mätaram - mother; bhakta-vndam - the multitude of devotees; ca - and; mätbhakta - devoted to His mother; çira-maëiù - crest-jewel; navadvépät - from
Navadvépa; samänaya - summoned; tat-duùkham - their sorrows; parimocayan liberating.
That crest-jewel among devoted sons then called for His mother and all the
Navadvépa-bhaktas. Thus they become fully freed from all melancholy.

tayä päcitam anna ca / cätur-vvidhya yathocitam
bhaktähläda-çatair bhukto / nityänanda-kutühalé 20
tayä - by her; päcitam - cooked; annam - foods; ca - and; cätu-vidhyam - of four
kinds; yathä-ucitam - according to suitability; bhakta-ähläda-çatai - with
hundreds of blissful devotees; bhukta - enjoyed; nityänanda - personified eternal
bliss; kutühalé - celebrant.
In accordance with Çacé-nandana's requirements, Çacé Devé cooked the four kinds
of food, and the Lord enjoyed them in the company of hundreds of blissful bhaktas,
of whom Nityänanda was the chief celebrant.

eva çré-bhakta-vargänä / gräme gräme ghe ghe
bhuktvä pétvä sukha ktva / yayau çré-puruottamam 21
evam - in the same way; çré-bhakta-vargänäm - of the various groups of
devotees; gräme gräme - from town to town; ghe ghe - from home to home;
bhuktvä - eating; pétvä - drinking; sukham - happily; ktva - having done; yayau He went; çré-purua-uttamam - (abode of the ultimate Person) Jagannätha Puré.
In the same way, from home to home, from village to village, to wherever His
bhaktas dwelled, Mahäprabhu went accepting food and drink and awarding joy.
Then He departed for Çré Puruñottama Dhäma.

çréman-nityänanda-rämaù / paëòitaù çré-gadädharaù

[p.517]
gaura-prema-sudhä-matto / gauräìga-präëa-vallabhaù 22
çrémat-nityänanda-rämaù - the avatära of Balaräma; paëòitaù - the learned
scholar; çré-gadädharaù - the personified devotional energy; gaura-prema - love
of Gaura; sudhä-matta - intoxicated by the nectar; gauräìga - the golden Lord;
präëa - life-breath; vallabhaù - beloved.
Çréman Nityänanda Räma and Paëita Çré Gadädhara were intoxicated by the
nectarean love they felt for Gauräìga. Indeed, that love was the vital energy which
sustained their life.

täbhyäm anugataù këo / gopénätha dadarça ha
säkän nanda-kumära ca / çré-vaçé-vadana vibhum 23
täbhyäm - with those two; anugataù - followed; këa - Kåñëa Caitanya;
gopénätham - the Deity of Gopénätha, the milk-sweet thief; dadarça - He saw; ha indeed; säkät - in Person; nanda-kumäram - the son of Nanda; ca - and; çré-vaçévadanam - playing on the bamboo flute; vibhum - the all-pervasive.
Followed by them, Kåñëa Caitanya went take darçana of Çré Kñéra-Corä Gopénätha,
who is the all-pervading player of the bamboo flute, the son of Nanda Mahäräja in
person.

gopé-manorathämodé / samäliìgya sthito hariù
dövä gadädharas tatra / gaura-këätmaka sukhé 24
gopé - of the gopés; mana-ratha - the desire; ämodé - taking pleasure;
samäliìgya - warmly embracing; sthita - standing; hariù - the remover of sin;
dövä - seeing; gadädhara - the ählädiné energy, pleasure potency personified;
tatra - there; gaura-këa-ätmakam - the two Lords Gaura and Kåñëa being one
Self; sukhé - happy.
Delighting in Gopénätha in the mood of the gopés, Gaura Hari embraced Him, and
at that moment Gadädhara's heart grew happy as he saw Gaura and Kåñëa as a

[p.518]
single identity.

säkäd rädhä-svarüpo 'sau / ta dhtvä nija-vakasi
samänéya kautukena / sthäpayäm äsa niçcalam 25
säkät - in person; rädhä-svarüpa - the original form of Rädhä; asau Gadädhara; tam - Him; dhtvä - held; nija-vakasi - to his chest; samänéya - taking;
kautukena - out of eagerness; sthäpayäm äsa - He replaced; niçcalam - unmoving.
Since Çré Gadädharah in his original form, is Çrématé Rädhäräëé, Herself, he also
eagerly drew Gopénätha to his chest, and then left Him standing motionless.

tasya päcitam anna ca / gopé-näthävaçeitam
gadä-bhg gaura-candrasya / samépe pulakävtaù 26
tasya - by him; päcitam - cooked; annam - foods; ca - and; gopé-nätha - of the
Lord of the gopés; avaçeitam - remnants; gadä-bht - Gadädhara; gaura-candrasya of Gaura Candra; samépe - near; pulaka-ävtaù - covered by erect hairs.
Gadädhara cooked for Gopénätha. Then, with his hairs bristling out of ecstacy, he
brought Gopénätha's remnants before Gaura Candra.

tenänumodito harät / satra-traya-samanvitam
prasäda gopénäthasya / vibhajya bubhuje purä 27
tena - by him; anumodita - permitted; harät - out of jubilation; satra - parts;
traya - three; samanvitam - with; prasädam - mercy-food; gopénäthasya - of the
Lord of the gopés; vibhajya - dividing; bubhuje - He ate; purä - first.
As approved by Gaura, Gadädhara happily divided the prasäda of Gopénätha into
three portions. Çréman Mahäprabhu ate first.

bhojayitvä sva-hastena / nityänandäya ca punaù

[p.519]
gadädharaù svaya cäpi / bubhuje rasa-kautuké 28
bhojayitvä - feeding; sva-hastena - with his hand; nitya-änandäya - to the ever
blissful Lord; ca - and; punaù - further; gadädharaù; svayam - himself; ca api also; bubhuje - ate; rasa-kautuké - eager for transcendental mellows.
Gadädhara fed the prasäda to Nityänanda with his own hand. Then being eager to
taste rasa, Gadädhara also delighted in those rasa-imbued remnants.

tataç ca gauräìgaù sukhopaviöo / gadädhareëäpi svaya rasa-jïaù
räsotsuko räsa-rasena matto / rämoparäme rasa-räma-räme 29
tata - then; ca - and; gauräìgaù - the Golden Lord; sukha-upaviöa - sitting
comfortably; gadädhareëa - by Gadädhara; api - indeed; svayam - spontaneously;
rasa-jïaù - wise in the rasas; räsa-utsuka - eager for news of the räsa-lélä; räsarasena - by the mellows of the räsa-lélä; matta - intoxicated; räma-uparäme ceasing all external pleasures, or as Nityänanda rested; rasa - who is the
complete form of transcendental mellows; räma - of the reservoir of pleasure;
räme - delighting.
While Nityänanda Räma rested, Çré Gauräìga became pleasantly seated in the
company of Gadädhara, and out of spontaneous attraction that connoisseur of rasa
eagerly heard from him of the räsa-lélä. Thus inebriated by mädhurya-rasa, Gaura
left the world of externals and solely delighted in the reservoir of all delight and the
form of all rasa, Lord Gopénätha.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Sarga entitled "Caitanya Deva Beholds Lord
Gopénätha," in the Third Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
FOURTH PRAKRAMA

[p.520]
* * *
First Sarga
käçé-väsé-tapana-miçra-ädi-anugrahaù
Gaura Shows Mercy to Tapana Miçra
and the Residents of Käçé

eva jagau räga-rasän néläcale / çré-këa-saìkértana-pürëa-mänasaù
svarüpa-mukhyair gadädharädyaiù / sama nanartta sa hi nämakautuké 1
evam - thus; jagau - He sang; räga-rasät - out of attachment; néla-acale - at the
immovable blue mountain (at Jagannätha Puré); çré-këa-saìkértana congregational celebration of Çré Kåñëa's pastimes; pürëa-mänasaù - heart full;
svarüpa-mukhyai - headed by Svarüpa Dämodara; gadädhara-ädyaiù - by those
headed by Gadädhara; samam - together; nanarta - He danced; sa - He; hi certainly; näma-kautuké - eager for the name.
When Mahäprabhu arrived in Néläcala absorbed in the mood of the mädhurya-rasa
of the räsa-lélä, in the company of His beloved devotees headed by Svarüpa and
Gadädhara, His heart overflooded with the mellows of Kåñëa-saìkértana, and out of
spontaneous attraction for Rädhä-Govinda's lotus feet, He sang and danced, eager
for the nectar of Çré Näma.

çré-särvvabhaumena saha çré-rämä- / nandädayaù ketra-niväsino ye
äjagmuù çré-gaura-rasena pürëäù / papus tu harän mukha-paìkaja
prabhoù 2
çré-särvabhaumena - with the Bhaööäcärya; saha - together; çré-räma-änandaädayaù - headed by Çré Rämänanda; ketra-niväsina - the residents of Kñetra; ye -

[p.521]
who; äjagmuù - came; çré-gaura-rasena - by the mellows taught by Gaura;
pürëäù - filled; papu - they drank; tu - indeed; harät - out of rapture; mukhapaìkajam - the lotus face; prabhoù - of the Master.
Headed by Çré Rämänanda and Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya, the residents of Kñetra
approached Gaura Prabhu, overflowing with the devotional mellows which they had
imbibed from Him, and as they joyously drank the elixirean vision of His lotus face
they quenched the thirst of their eyes.

çëvanti saìkértana-näma-maìgala / gäyanty änanda-samudramagnäù
ntyanti sarvve rasikendra-maulinä / gauräìga-candreëa sama
vihastäù 3
çëvanti - they listen; saìkértana-näma-maìgalam - to the auspicious
congregational chanting of the holy names; gäyanti - they sing; änanda - of bliss;
samudra-magnäù - merged in the ocean; ntyanti - they dance; sarve - all; rasikaindra-maulinä - with the crest-jewel and best of all rasikas; gauräìga-candreëa with the moon of Gauräìga; samam - together; vihastäù - eager.
Hearing and singing the auspicious saìkértana of Çré Hari-näma, they helplessly
drowned within an ocean of änanda, and danced with Çré Gauräìga Candra, the
crest-jewel of all rasikas.

käçéçvaro räma-mukunda-mukhyau / vakreçvaro räghavaväsudevau
çré-çaìkara-çré-haridäsa-gauré- / däsädayas te hi gauòa-väsinaù 4
khaëòa-sthitäù çré-raghunandanädayo / gauräìga-bhävena
vibhävitäntaräù
kuléna-gräma-niväsinaù sukha / ntyanti gäyanti namanti santatam 5
käçéçvara; räma-mukunda; mukhyau - headed by; vakreçvara; räghava-

[p.522]
väsudevau; çré-çaìkara-çré-haridäsa-gauré-däsa; ädaya - headed by; te - they; hi indeed; gauòa-väsinaù - the residents of Bengal; khaëòa-sthitäù - the residents of
Khaëa; çré-raghunandana; ädaya - headed by; gauräìga-bhävena - with the
moods of Gauräìga; vibhävita-antaräù - internally awakened; kuléna-grämaniväsinaù - the residents of Kuléna-gräma; sukham - happily; ntyanti - they
dance; gäyanti - they sing; namanti - they bow down; santatam - continously.
The inhabitants of Gauòa headed by Käçéçvara Paëita, Nityänanda Räma and
Mukunda, Vakreçvara Paëita, Räghava Paëita and Väsudeva Datta, Çaìkara Paëita,
Haridäsa häkura, Gaurédäsa Paëita, the residents of Khaëa headed by Çré
Raghunandana, and the residents of Kuléna-gräma were all experiencing the internal
awakening of their ecstatic love for Kåñëa through relishing the moods inspired by
Çré Gauräìga. Thus they continously danced, sang, and ceaselessly bowed down
jubilantly before the Lord.

ntyävasäne prabhur acyutaù svaya / präha para bhaktajanänukampavän
vndävana ramyam atéva durlabha / gacchämi yac ced bhavatäm kpä
bhavet 6
ntya-ävasäne - at the end of dancing; prabhu - the Master; acyutaù - the
infallible; svayam - self-inspired; präha - He said; param - great; bhakta-jana devotee people; anukampavän - sympathetic; vndävanam; ramyam - enchanting;
atéva - extremely; durlabham - rare; gacchämi - I am going; yat - which; cet - if;
bhavatäm - of your honors; kpä - mercy; bhavet - it may be.
When the dancing ended, the infallible and self-inspired Prabhu, the Personality of
Godhead, feeling empathy with His devotees, said, "If your good selves would
kindly show Me your mercy, I shall now depart for the enchanting and rarelyachieved land of Çré Våndävana."

pibanti gauräìga-mukhäbja-péyüa / pürëäs tathä te 'pi su-duùkhitä
bhçam
krandanti gauräìga-padäravinde / nipatya dantägra-tëä vadanti 7

[p.523]
pibanti - they drink; gauräìga-mukha-abja - Gauräìga's lotus face; péyüam ambrosia; pürëäh - filled; tathä - and; te - they; api - although; su-duùkhitä - very
sad; bhçam - intensely; krandanti - they weep; gauräìga-pada-aravinde - at His
lotus feet; nipatya - falling down; danta-agra - in the tips of their teeth; tëä grass; vadanti - they say.
Although still absorbed in drinking the ambrosia of Gauräìga's lotus face, they felt
simultaneously intense sorrow of separation and collapsed at His lotus feet weeping.
Then, taking straw between their teeth, they said:

tvam eva vndävana-candra he prabho / tathäpi däsänumatena vai
sarvvam
karttu sadä pcchasi sämprata kila / tan nanda-nandana-mukhän
vidhehi naù 8
tvam - You; eva - certainly; vndävana-candra - O moon of Våndävana; he - Oh!;
prabho - O Master; tathäpi - still; däsa-anumatena - by considering Yourself a
servant; vai - verily; sarvam - everything; kartum - to do; sadä - always; pcchasi You ask; sämpratam - presently; kila - indeed; tat - that; nanda-nandana - as the
son of Nanda; mukhän - before the faces; vidhehi - bestow; naù - to us.
"He Prabhu! Undoubtedly You are the supreme master VåndävanaCandraKåñëa,
Nevertheless, having adopted the mood of servant of the servant, You always
request our permission about everything. Accordingly, O son of Nanda, our request
is that You kindly remain in our presence."

eva çrutvä hasan präha / bhavatä sannidhau sadä
tiöhäméti bruvan çéghra / gamanäya ktodyamaù 9
evam - thus; çrutvä - hearing; hasan - laughing; präha - He said; bhavatäm - of
your honors; sannidhau - in the presence; sadä - always; tiöhämi - I stay; iti thus; bruvan - saying; çéghram - speedily; gamanäya - to go; kta-udyamaù -

[p.524]
made an attempt.
Hearing this, the Lord laughed and replied, "Without doubt I forever dwell in the
presence of you great souls." At that, He at once attempted to leave.

rudatas tän samäliìgya / sa säntvayya punaù punaù
äyäsyeti bruvan këo / yayau vndävana çubham 10
rudata - weeping; tän - them; samäliìgya - warmly embracing; sa - He;
säntvaya - pacified; punaù punaù - repeatedly; äyäsya - returning; iti - thus;
bruvan - saying; këa; yayau - went away; vndävanam; çubham - resplendent.
Kåñëa Caitanya warmly embraced His weeping bhaktas, and comforted them,
saying again and gain, "I shall return soon." Then He departed for Çré Çré
RädhäKåñëa's resplendent abode, Çré Våndävana.

sotkaëöha dhävatas tasya / matta-siha iva prabhoù
saìgino baladevädyä / dhävanti tam anuvratäù 11
sa-utkaëöham - with longing; dhävata - running; tasya - of Him; matta-siha - an
intoxicated lion; iva - like; prabhoù - of the Master; saìgina - of the associates;
baladeva-ädyä - headed by Balabhadra Bhaööäcärya; dhävanti - they ran; tam Him; anuvratäù - devoted.
Feeling immense longing for Çré Kåñëa, Gaura Hari ran swiftly appearing like a
maddened lion,. Mahäprabhu's companions, Balabhadra Bhaööäcärya and the other
brähmaëa also followed running after Him.

yatra yatra parvvata ca / nadéç ca paramaù prabhuù
paçyan govarddhana vndävana kälindém apy asau 12
yatra yatra - wherever; parvatam - a hill; ca - and; nadé - a river; ca - and;
paramaù prabhuù - the Supreme Lord; paçyan - seeing; govardhanam - the hill of

[p.525]
Govardhana; vndävanam - the forest of Våndä; kälindém - the Yamunä river,
daughter of the Kalinda mountain; api - only; asau - He.
Whenever they crossed a hill or river, the Supreme Lord could see only
Govardhana Hill, Våndävana, and the Kalindé River.

matta-huìkära-nirghoo / matta-dvirada-vikramaù
ntyati dhävati rauti / kitau viluöhati kvacit 13
matta - overjoyed; huìkära - roars; nirghoa - vibrated; matta-dvirada intoxicated elephant; vikramaù - power; ntyati - He dances; dhävati - runs; rauti roars; kitau - on the earth; viluöhati - He rolls about; kvacit - at times.
Moving with the vigor of an intoxicated elephant, He sometimes danced,
sometimes ran, sometimes uttered thunderous roars, and sometimes He rolled about
upon the earth.

eva krameëa bhagavän / käçém upajagäma ha
viçveçvara-mahä-liìga-darçanänanda-vihvalaù 14
evam - thus; krameëa - gradually; bhagavän - the Lord; käçém - Väräëasé;
upajagäma - He approached; ha - indeed; viçveçvara-mahä-liìga - the great Çivaliìgam named Viçveçvara; darçana-änanda-vihvalaù - entranced by the joy of
seeing.
Journeying in this way, Çré Gaura Bhagavän gradually reached the city of Käçé.
When He saw Viçveçvara, the great Çiva-liìgam, He became overwhelmed with bliss
.

tatraiva brähmaëaù kaçcit / tapanäkhyaù su-vaiëavaù
paçyan prabhu mahä-höo / ninäya nija-mandiram 15
tatra - there; eva - indeed; brähmaëaù kaçcit - a certain brähmaëa; tapanaäkhyaù - known as Tapana Miçra; su-vaiëavaù - a pure vaiñëava; paçyan - seeing;

[p.526]
prabhum - the Master; mahä-höa - very joyous; ninäya - bringing; nija-mandiram to His own home.
A certain pure brähmaëa-vaiñëava, named Tapana Miçra resided there. Seeing
Gaura Prabhu he became very joyous, and brought Him to his home.

tena sampüjitaù këaù / päda-prakälanädibhiù
bhikä ktvä ghe tasya / sukhäséno jagad-guruù 16
tena - by him; sampüjitaù - completely worshipped; këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya;
päda-prakälana-ädibhiù - by washing His feet and so on; bhikäm - alms; ktvä took; ghe - in the home; tasya - His; sukha-äséna - comfortably seated; jagatguruù - the spiritual guide for all living beings.
He worshipped Kåñëa Caitanya by washing His feet and offering Him various
pleasing articles, and the jagad-guru took His bhikñä comfortably seated within
Tapana's house.

tiöhati tat-sutenäpi / raghunäthena mänitaù
tasmai mahä-kpä cakre / bälakäya mahätmane 17
tiöhati - He stays; tat-sutena - by his son; api - also; raghunäthena - whose name
was Raghunätha; mänitaù - honored; tasmai - to him; mahä-kpäm - great mercy;
cakre - showed; bälakäya - to the boy; mahä-ätmane - noble soul.
He rested there attended to by Tapana's son, Raghunätha. The Lord showed
exceptional mercy to that great soul.

candra-çekhara-vaidyasya / ghe tiöhann api svayam
käçé-väsi-janän kurvvan / hari-bhakti-ratän kila 18
candra-çekhara-vaidyasya - of the physician Candra Çekhara; ghe - in the
house; tiöhan - staying; api - even; svayam - spontaneously; käçé-väsi-janän - the

[p.527]
people of Käçé; kurvan - making; hari-bhakti-ratän - attached to devotion to
Hari; kila - actually.
By His own sweet will, Gaura resided in the house of a physician, Candra Çekhara,
and while staying there He induced even the inhabitants of Käçé to delight in Haribhakti.

hari-saìkértanämodé / sva-bhakta-gaëa-veöitaù
hari vadeti saïjalpan / bähum utkipati sadä 19
hari-saìkértana - in chanting congregationally the names of Hari; ämodé - He
took pleasure; sva-bhakta-gaëa - His devotees; veöitaù - surrounded; harim - the
name of Hari; vada - chant; iti - thus; saïjalpan - crying; bähum - arms; utkipati He raised; sadä - always.
Surrounded by a group of His bhaktas, the son of Çacé revelled in çré-harisaìkértana of Çré Hari's names. With His arms ever raised to the sky, He cried out,
"Hari Bol!"

Thus ends the First Sarga entitled "Gaura Shows Mercy to Tapana Miçra and
the Residents of Käçé," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Second Sarga
mathurä-maëòala-darçanam
The Vista of Mathurä Maëala

tataù prayägam äsädya / dövä çré-mädhava prabhuù

[p.528]
premänanda-sudhä-pürëo / nanartta sva-janaiù saha 1
tataù - then; prayägam - Prayäga; äsädya - reached; dövä - saw; çré-mädhavam the Deity of Bindu-Mädhava; prabhuù - the Master; prema-änanda - the bliss of
love; sudhä - nectar; pürëaù - filled; nanarta - danced; sva-janaiù - with His own
men; saha - with.
Then Gaura Prabhu travelled to Prayäga. There as Mahäprabhu beheld the Deity of
Bindu-Mädhava He became overwhelmed by premänanda-sudhä as He danced in the
company of His people.

çréläkaya-vaöa dövä / triveëé-snänam äcaran
yamunäyä ca sammajya / ntyan päréndra-lélayä 2
çréla - glorious; akaya-vaöam - imperishable banyan; dövä - after seeing; tri-veëé
- confluence of the three rivers: Gaìgä, Yamunä and Sarasvaté; snänam - bath;
äcaran - showed by example; yamunäyäm - in the Yamunä; ca - and; sammajya bathing; ntyan - dancing; päréndra - of a lion; lélayä - like the play.
Then He saw the imperishable banyan tree named Akñaya-vaöa, and bathed in the
Triveëé, thus teaching the standard for humanity. After Gauräìga had bathed in the
Yamunä, He began to dance like a playful lion.

huìkära-gambhérärävaiù / premäçru-pulakair vtaù
vrajan kramät täm uttéryya / vana cägra dadarça ha 3
huìkära - roars; gambhéra - deep; ärävaiù - with cries; prema-açru - tears of
love; pulakaiù - with erect hairs; vtaù - covered; vrajan - going; kramät gradually; täm - that; uttérya - crossing; vanam - forest; ca - and; agram - Agra;
dadarça - saw; ha - indeed.
Crying out with deep thundering roars, all the hairs of His body thrilled with
rapture, and He became bathed by His own love-tears. After some time the Lord
crossed the river and saw the forest of Agra.

[p.529]
tatraiva reëukä näma / grämo yatra yudhä patiù
jämadagnir mahätmä ca / puëya-ketre yayau tataù 4
tatra - there; eva - surely; reëukä näma - named Reëuka; grämaù - town; yatra where; yudhäm patiù - the master of fighters; jämadagniù - Lord Päraçu-räma;
maha-ätmä - great soul; ca - and; puëya-ketre - in the sacred place; yayau - He
went; tataù - then.
In that forest was the town of Reëukä. In that very spot the great soul Paraçuräma,
the son of Jamadagni, and Reëukä and master of all warriors, took his birth. The
Lord visited that sacred tract of land.

tatraiva yamunä dövä / vndäraëyonmukhé sadä
räja-gräma tato gatvä / gokula prekya vihvalaù 5
tatra - there; eva - surely; yamunäm - Yamunä river; dövä - having seen; vndäaraëya - the forest of Våndä; unmukhé - facing; sadä - always; räja-grämam - the
town of the King; tataù - then; gatvä - having gone; gokulam - Gokula; prekya seeing; vihvalaù - overwhelmed.
After seeing the Yamunä river, which forever flows through the forest of
Våndäraëya. Advancing further to Räjagräma, He became overwhelmed with feelings
of ecstacy as He looked upon the realm of Gokula.

mahäraëya ca sampaçyan / mathurä ca dadarça ha
räja-dhäné mahaiçvaryya-yuktä parama-çobhanäm 6
mahä-araëyam - the great forest; ca - and; sampaçyan - thoroughly seeing;
mathuräm - the city of Mathurä; ca - and; dadarça - saw; ha - indeed; räjadhäném - capital; mahä-aiçvarya - great opulence; yuktäm - endowed with;
parama-çobhanäm - supreme beauty.

[p.530]
After looking over the forest of Mahävana, Gaura saw Mathurä, the capital, which
was endowed with great opulence and designed with exquisite craftmanship.

çré-vaikuëöhädi-dhämnä hi / paramärädhana bhuvi
çré-këa-prakaöa cäpi / prema-bhakti-pradäyiném 7
çré-vaikuëtha-ädi-dhämnäm - of the abodes of the Lord of Vaikuëöha and of all
worlds; hi - certainly; parama-ärädhanam - supremely worshipable; bhuvi - on
the earth; çré-këa-prakaöam - the manifestation of Çré Kåñëa; ca - and; api assuredly; prema-bhakti - devotional love; pradäyiném - bestower.
Throughout this earth, Çré Mathurä is the most worshipable spot. Indeed, it is the
most worshippable of all the abodes of the Lord of Vaikuëöha, for it is there that
svaya bhagavän Çré Kåñëa the original Personality of Godhead manifested Himself in
this world. Undoubtedly Mathurä Dhäma is itself able to award prema-bhakti.

dövä gaura-hariù prema-vikära-sarvva-sayutaù
hasan ntyan rudan bhumau / viluöhan pulakäcitaù 8
dövä - having seen; gaura-hariù - Lord Hari in His golden complexion; premavikära - transformations of Kåñëa-love; sarva - all; sayutaù - endowed with;
hasan - laughing; ntyan - dancing; rudan - crying; bhumau - on the earth;
viluöhan - rolling about; pulaka - hairs erect; acitaù - expanded.
Simply by glancing over that place, the Golden Lord experienced all the
transformations of Kåñëa-prema. While laughing, dancing, weeping and rolling
about upon the earth, His body became covered by large thrill bumps which
appeared like kadamba flowers.

tatraiva kaçcid dvija-varyya-sattamaù / paçyan hari prema-vibhinnadhairyyaù
romäïcitair yukta-sa-gadgada kté / papäta pädau jagad-éçvarasya 9

[p.531]
tatra - there; eva - surely; kaçcit - a certain; dvija-varya - best of the twiceborn; sattamaù - eminent; paçyan - seeing; harim - Lord Hari; prema - love;
vibhinna-dhairyaù - patience fractured; roma-aïcitaiù - expanding of the hairs;
yukta - having; sa-gadgadam - with choked throat; kté - virtuous; papäta - He
fell; pädau - at the feet; jagat-éçvarasya - of the Lord of all sentient beings.
A certain eminent brähmaëa was observing these activities of Çré Hari. Suddenly
his own composure also became wholly shattered by emotions of Kåñëa-prema. As
that fortunate soul fell at the feet of Gaura Jagadéçvara, his voice became choked,
and his hair-follicles erupted.

kas tva bhavän prema-vibhinna-dhairyyo / döo 'si me bhägya-vaçäd
iti svayam
prétaù punaù präha sa eva ca prabhu / däso 'smy aha te bhagavan
dayä-nidhe 10
kaù - who?; tvam - you; bhavän - your honor; prema - love; vibhinna - fracture;
dhairyaù - patience; döaù - seen; asi - you are; me - by Me; bhägya-vaçät - by the
force of good fortune; iti - thus; svayam - spontaneously; prétaù - pleased; punaù again; präha - he said; saù - he; eva - certainly; ca - and; prabhum - the Master,
däsaù - servant, asmi - I am; aham - I; te - Your; bhagavan - O all-opulent Lord;
dayä-nidhe - O ocean of mercy.
The Lord said, "May I know your grace's identity? By the influence of good fortune,
I have seen your composure devastated by the symptoms of prema." That vaiñëava,
his heart engladdened, replied to Prabhu, "O Bhagavän! O ocean of mercy! I am
Your eternal servant.

nämnä hi mätra yadi këa-däsas / tathäpi tvad-darçana-bhägyavän
aham
kpä-nidhe vaiñëava-päda-reëubhiù / punéha mä nanda-kiçora gaura
11

[p.532]
nämnä - by name; hi - certainly; mätram - only; yadi - if; këa-däsaù - Kåñëa
Däsa; tathä api - still; tvat-darçana - the sight of Your Lordship; bhägyavän fortunate; aham - I; kpä-nidhe - O jewel of compassion; vaiñëava-päda - the feet
of vaiñëavas; reëubhiù - by the dust; punéha - purify; mäm - me; nanda-kiçora - O
youthful son of Nanda; gaura - O golden Lord.
"I am known as Kåñëa Däsa, but by name only do I have that honor. However, I am
now rendered fortunate by Your darçana. O jewel of compassion! Kindly purify me
with the dust from the feet of the vaiñëavas, O youthful son of Nanda! Golden
Lord!"

çrutvä prabhur hara-rasäbdhi-magnaù / präha tva eva khalu këadäsaù
çré-këa-dhämno hi rahasya-lélä / janäsi sarvvä kathayasva sattama
12
çrutvä - having heard; prabhuù - the Master; hara-rasa - mellow of joy; abdhimagnaù - immersed in the ocean; präha - He said; tvam - you; khalu eva certainly; këa-däsaù - the servant of Kåñëa; çré-këa-dhämnaù - of the abode of Çré
Kåñëa; hi - surely; rahasya-léläm - confidential pastimes; jänäsi - you know;
sarväm - all; kathayasva - speak of it; sattama - O pure soul.
Hearing this, Çré Prabhu became immersed in a sea of transcendental bliss and
said, "Most certainly You are a bonafide servant of Çré Kåñëa, indeed you are
conversant with the confidential pastimes of Kåñëa's dhäma. O pure soul! Kindly
narrate all of them to Me."

sa tv enam äha çëu keçava prabho / yadi svaya bhakta-janäbhimäné
tathäpi pädau vinidhäya me hdi / prakäçaya tva madhu-maëòala
nijam 13
saù - he; tu - but; enam - Him; äha - he said; çëu - listen; keçava - O Keçava;
prabho - O Master; yadi - if; svayam - Yourself; bhakta-jana-abhimäné - He who is

[p.533]
pleased by His devotees; tathä api - still; pädau - the two feet; vinidhäya placing; me - my; hdi - in the heart; prakäçaya - revealing; tvam - You; madhumaëòala - the circular area of Mathurä; nijam - Yourself.
But the brähmaëa replied to the Lord, "Hear me, O Keçava Prabhu! If You are
actually pleased with this bhakta, then by your heart's desire place Your two feet
within my heart and reveal to me Çré Madhu Maëòala."

pétvä ca tasya vacanämåta harir / jagäda jémüta-gabhérayä girä
mad-äjïayä te ca çré-këa-léläù / sphurantu dhämäni ca sarvvataù
sukham 14
pétvä - having drunk; ca - and; tasya - his; vacana-amåtam - words of nectar;
hariù - the dispeller of evil; jagäda - said; jémüta - cloud; gabhérayä - with deep;
girä - utterances; mat-äjïayä - by my order; te - to You; ca - and; çré-këa-léläù the pastimes of Çré Kåñëa; sphurantu - they must be displayed; dhämäni - the
abodes; ca - and; sarvataù - in all ways; sukham - happily.
Çré Hari drank deep of his nectarean words and replied in a deep resonant voice
like a thundercloud, "By My order, may the pastimes of Kåñëa and every delightful
aspect of His holy abodes be revealed to you."

tadä sa vipraç caraëäbja-sannidhau / papäta hareëa prabhor dayänidhe
dhtvä padau te mama mastakopari / sandarçayiye bhavate ca
sarvvam 15
tadä - then; saù - he; vipraù - the learned brähmaëa; caraëa-abja - lotus feet;
sannidhau - near; papäta - he fell; hareëa - with joy; prabhoù - of our Prabhu;
dayä-nidhe - O ocean of mercy; dhtvä - having held; padau - two feet; te - Your;
mama - my; mastaka - head; upari - above; sandarçayiye - I shall completely
show; bhavate - unto Your honor; ca - and; sarvam - all.

[p.534]
Then fell joyously at Prabhu's lotus feet, the learned brähmaëa said, "O ocean of
compassion! Just place Your feet upon my head, and I shall certainly show all of the
holy places to Your Grace."

iti bruvan gaura-rasena matto / ntyan rudan prema-vibhinnadhairyyaù
çré-räsa-lélämbu-viläsa-vaibhavam / agäyata gopé-patir muhur
muhuù 16
iti - thus; bruvan - saying; gaura-rasena - by the mellow of Gaura; mattaù intoxicated; ntyan - dancing; rudan - weeping; prema - due to love; vibhinnadhairyaù - patience shattered; çré-räsa-lélä - pastimes of the räsa dance; ambuviläsa - water pastimes; vaibhavam - influence; agäyata - he sang; gopé-patiù - the
master of the milkmaids; muhuù muhuù - again and again.
So saying, intoxicated by Gaura-rasa, and agitated by feelings of prema, Kåñëa Däsa
danced and wept. And the master of the gopés, sang çloka after çloka describing the
glorious water-sports which Çré Çyämasundara played in Yamunä with the gopés
who were weary from räsa-dancing.

präpa jagan-mohana-lélayä hariù / sukha rajanyä vraja-kelivärttayä
çré-rädhikä-kåëa-viläsa-läsya / jagau para bhakti-rasena pürnaù 17
präpa - He took; jagat-mohana - enchanting the universe; lélayä - by the
pastime; hariù - remover of sin; sukham - pleasure; rajanyäm - at night; vrajakeli - playful sports of Vraja; värttayä - by the descriptions; çré-rädhikä-kåëaviläsa - pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhikä-Kåñëa; läsyam - dancing; jagau - sang; param
- transcendental; bhakti-rasena - mellows of devotion; pürnaù - full.
Throughout that night, Çré Gaura Hari took pleasure in narrating the worldenchanting playful sportive pastimes of Vraja, and sang with devotional feeling of
the transcendental dance pastimes of Çré Rädhikä-Ramaëa.

[p.535]
Thus ends the Second Sarga entitled "The Vista of Mathurä Maëala," in the
Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Kåñëa-Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Third Sarga
dvädaça-vana-prasaìgaù
Visiting the Twelve Forests

eva tä rajané nétvä / kaëa-präya çacé-sutaù
utkaëöhitaù prabhäte ca / vipram ähüya sa-tvaram 1
evam - thus; täm - that; rajaném - night; nétvä - having passed; kaëa-präyam just as a moment; çacé-sutaù - the son of Çacé; utkaëöhitaù - very eager; prabhäte in the evening; ca - and; vipram - the learned brähmaëa; ähüya - calling; satvaram - quickly.
That night passed just like a moment, and at dawn the son of Çacé anxiously hailed
the vipra to come quickly.

proväca me darçaya tva / mathurä-maëòala sakhe
yena hi paramä prétir / bhaved eva tathä vacaù 2
proväca - He said; me - to Me; darçaya - please show; tvam - you; mathurämaëòalam - the circle of Mathurä; sakhe - O friend; yena - whereby; hi - surely;
paramä - supreme; préti - love; bhavet - may be; evam - thus; tathä - so; vacaù words.
He said, "He sakhe! Please show Me the Mathurä Maëala, which causes supreme

[p.536]
love for the youthful couple to awaken."

so 'py äha mäthure brahman / yamunä sarvvato 'dhikä
yasyä préti samäsädya / këaù sarvveçvareçvaraù 3
gopa-gopé-rasämodé / paramätmä naräktiù
khelati sma sukha räsa-jala-keli-kutühalé 4
sa api - that very person; äha - replied; mäthure - in Mathurä; brahman - O
Spirit; yamunä - the personality of Yamunä; sarvata - in all respects; adhikä superior; yasyäm - in whom; prétim - love; samäsädya - attaining; këaù; sarvaéçvara-éçvaraù - the controller of all controllers; gopa-gopé - with the cowherds
and milkmaids; rasa-ämodé - the enjoyer of rasa; parama-ätmä - Supersoul; naraäktiù - the appearance of a man; khelati - sports; sma - indeed; sukham - happily;
räsa - the Räsa dance; jala-keli - water-sports; kutühalé - exuberant play.
Kåñëa Däsa replied, "O Supreme Spirit! Throughout the land of Mathurä, the Çré
Yamunä Mahäräëé is in every respect the highest authority. Because of affection for
her, Çré Vrajendranandana Kåñëa, although the controller of all controllers and the
all-pervading Supersoul, He accepts a manlike form, and exulting in the rasas of the
gopas and gopés, sports joyously in the räsa dance and exuberantly plays in her
waters.

kälindyäù paçcime bhäge / madhu-vndävana param
kumuda khadira caiva / täla-kämya-bahülakam 5
kälindyäù - of Yamunä; paçcime bhäge - on the western side; madhu charming; vndävanam - the vana (forest) of Våndä; param - transcendental;
kumudam khadiram - the forests; ca - and; eva - certainly; täla-kämya-bahülakam
- the forests.
"On the western side of the Yamunä, child of the Kalinda mountain, lies the
charming and transcendental vana of Våndä as well as Madhu, Kumuda, Khadira,
Täla, Kämya and Bahüla vanas.

[p.537]
asyäù pürvve bhadra-bilva-loha-bhäëòéra-nämakam
mahad-vana ca rasikair / dhyäyante préti-hetave 6
asyäù - of her; pürve - on the east; bhadra-bilva-loha-bhäëòéra - the forests;
nämakam - named; mahat-vanam - the great forest; ca - and; rasikai - by those
expert in relishing rasa; dhyäyante - they contemplate; préti-hetave - for the
purpose of love.
"To Çré Yamunä's east are the vanas named Bhadra, Bilva, Loha, Bhäëéra as well as
Mahävana, which are meditated upon by persons expert at relishing rasa in order to
achieve love for the Lord.

bhadra-çré-loha-bhäëòira-mahä-täla-khadirakam
bahüla kumuda kämya madhu vndävana tathä 7
dvädaçaitad vana ramya / çré-këa-préti-da sadä
mahattvam eä jänanti / bhaktä nänye kadäcana 8
bhadra-çré-loha-bhäëòira-mahä-täla-khadirakam; bahülam; kumudam;
kämyam; madhu; vndävanam; tathä - also; dvädaça - twelve; etat - this; vanam forests; ramyam - charming; çré-këa-préti-dam - give love to Çré Kåñëa; sadä always; mahattvam - greatness; eäm - of them; jänanti - they know; bhaktä devotees; na - not; anye - others; kadäcana - in any way.
"These twelve delightful vanas - Bhadra, Loha, Bhäëéra, Mahä, Täla, Khadira,
Bahüla, Kumuda, Kämya, Madhu and Våndä - perpetually bestow love for Kåñëa.
Bhaktas know the glories of these forests, whereas one without bhakti can never
know those glories.

yamunä-paçcime bhäge / kasasya sadana param
asyottare mahä-ramya / vndäraëya su-durlabham 9

[p.538]
yamunä-paçcime - to the west of Yamunä; bhäge - side; kasasya - of Kasa;
sadanam - residence; param - great; asya - of that; uttare - to the north; mahäramyam - very pleasing; vndä-araëyam - the forest of Våndä; su-durlabham most difficult to achieve.
"On the western side of Yämunä lies the great palace of Kasa. To the north of it lies
the very enchanting and rarely-achieved forest of Våndä.

kumudäkhya-vana tasyä / nairjhate sukha-da hareù
tad-dakiëe khadiräkhya / vana këa-sukha-pradam 10
kumuda-akhya-vanam; tasyä - of her; nairjhate - to the southwest; sukha-dam giving joy; hareù - for Hari; tat-dakiëe - on the south; khadira-äkhyam - known
as Khadira; vanam - forest; këa-sukha-pradam - giving joy to Kåñëa.
"To Yamunä's southwest lies Kumudavana, who gives pleasure to Çré Hari. To her
south is Khadiravana, who also gives Kåñëa joy.

mathurä-paçcime täla-vana keçava-vallabham
nadé tatra mänasäkhyä / gaìgä bhuvana-pävané 11
mathurä-paçcime - on the west of Mathurä; täla-vanam; keçava-vallabham beloved of Keçava; nadé - river; tatra - there; mänasa-äkhyä - named Mänasa;
gaìgä; bhuvana-pävané - purifier of all the worlds.
"To the west of Mathurä lies Tälavana, the beloved forest of Keçava. There flows a
river named Mänasi Gaìgä, who purifies all the worlds.

vndäraëya-paçcime ca / govarddhana-gires taöe
çré-këaù kréòati yatra / naukä-khaëädi-lélayä 12
vndä-araëya - of the forest of Våndä; paçcime - on the west; ca - and;
govardhana-gire - of Govardhana hill; taöe - on the border; çré-këaù - all-

[p.539]
attractive; kréòati - plays; yatra - where; naukä-khaëda-ädi-lélayä - by pastimes
headed by boating.
"It lies to the west of Våndäraëya, bordering on Govardhana hill. In her waters
Kåñëa engages in boating-sports and other pastimes.

mathurä-paçcime govarddhano näma mahä-giriù
tasyäpi paçcime kämya-vana këa-rasäyanam 13
mathurä-paçcime - to the west of Mathurä; govardhana; näma - named; mahägiriù - great hill; tasya - of him; api - and; paçcime - to the west; kämya-vana; këarasäyanam - which is a source of all rasa for Kåñëa.
"To the west of Mathurä lies the great hill named Govardhana, and to the west of
Govardhana lies Kämyavana, which is a reservoir of all rasa for Çré Kåñëa.

tat-sannidhye mahä-puëyä / sarasvaté nadé subhä
madhu-puryyä uttare ca / yamunäm anudhävati 14
tat-sannidhye - in that vicinity; mahä-puëyä - very holy; sarasvaté-nadé - river;
subhä - splendid; madhu-puryä - of Madhu-puré; uttare - to the north; ca - and;
yamunäm; anudhävati - flowing swiftly after.
"Nearby Kämyavana, to the north of Madhu-puré, is the splendid and very
sanctified river Sarasvaté, who flows northwards following the direction of Çré
Yamunä.

aiçänyä mathuräyäç ca / bahüläkhya-vana çubha
manogaìgä samuttéryya / yatra kréòati kasa-hä 15
aiçänyäm - to the northeast; mathuräyä - of Mathurä; ca - and; bahüla-äkhyavanam - forest named Bahülä; çubham - beautiful; mana-gaìgä - the Gaìgä from
Kåñëa's mind; samuttérya - crossing; yatra - where; kréòati - sports; kasa-hä - the

[p.540]
killer of Kasa.
"To the northeast of Mathurä is the shining forest of the name Bahüla. Here the
slayer of Kasa crosses the Manasi Gaìgä and enjoys sports.

mohanäkhya-vana caiva / kathitäni mahä-bhuja
vanäni sapta-yamunä-paçcime ha para çëu 16
mohana-äkhya-vanam - the forest described as enchanting; ca - and; eva indeed; kathitäni - described; mahä-bhuja - O mighty armed; vanäni - forests;
sapta - seven; yamunä-paçcime - on the west of Yamunä; ha - indeed; param further; çëu - hear.
"That forest is described as mohana or enchanting. Thus the seven forests to the
west of Çré Yamunä Mahäräëé have been described. O mighty-armed one! Hear
further.

tasyä pürvva-küle païca / vanäni rasikeçvara
tat-kåpäpära-vaçyena / lakñyate vipula mayä 17
tasyä - of her; pürva-küle - on the eastern bank; païca-vanäni - five forests;
rasika-éçvara - O Lord of those who relish rasa; tat-kåpä - Your mercy; apära unbounded; vaçyena - by the power; lakñyate - it has been seen; vipulam extensively; mayä - by me.
"On Yamunä's eastern bank lie five forests. O rasikeçvara! By the power of
Yamunä's unbounded mercy, they have been seen extensively by me.

yamunäyäù su-nikaöe / mahäraëya su-durlabham
bilva tat-paçcime ramya / këa-prema-phala-pradam 18
yamunäyäù - of Yamunä; su-nikaöe - very near; mahä-araëyam - the great
forest, Mahävana; su-durlabham - very hard to achieve; bilvam; tat-paçcime - to

[p.541]
the west of that; ramyam - delightful; këa-prema - love for Kåñëa; phala-pradam bestowing the fruit.
"Very near to the Yamunä is Mahäraëya, which is very difficult to attain, and to the
west of Mahäraëya lies delightful Bilvavana, which bestows the fruit of love for
Kåñëa.

tasyottare loha-näma-vana bhadra-vana tathä
bhäëòéraka-vana ramya / këa-bhakti-prada mahat 19
tasya - of that; uttare - to the north; loha-näma-vanam - named Loha-vana;
bhadra-vanam; tathä - also; bhäëòéraka-vanam; ramyam - pleasure-filled; këabhakti-pradam - bestowing devotion to Kåñëa; mahat - great.
"To the north of Bilvavana lies Lohavana, Bhadravana and also the great pleasurefilled Bhäëérakavana, which awards the aspiring bhakta the gift of bhakti unto Çré
Kåñëa.

dvädaçaitad vana ramya / mathurä-maëòala prabho
eteu viharaty eva / këo yogeçvareçvaraù 20
dvädaça - twelve; etat - this; vanam - group of forests; ramyam - delightful;
mathurä-maëòalam - the circle of Mathurä; prabho - O Master; eteu - within
them; viharati - He enjoys; eva - surely; këa - all-attractive; yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù the master of all masters of mystic power.
"O Prabhu! These are the twelve charming forests of Mathurä Maëala. Within them
sported Yogeçvareçvara Kåñëa.

pratyeka darçayiyämi / yasmät te 'nugraho mayi
bhaved eva hñékeça / yena syäd bhava-mocanam 21
prati-ekam - each one; darçayiyämi - I shall show; yasmät - from which; te -

[p.542]
Your; anugraha - mercy; mayi - on Me; bhavet - it may be; eva - indeed; hñéka-éça O Lord of the senses; yena - whereby; syät - there may be; bhava-mocanam freedom from material existence.
"I shall show each of them to You, aspiring to receive Your mercy. For, O Håñikeça,
anyone who receives that mercy, is thereby freed from bondage to this world of
matter."

Thus ends the Third Sarga entitled "Visiting the Twelve Forests," in the
Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fourth Sarga
mathurä-maëòala-ghaööa-küpa-ädi-darçanam
Seeing the Bathing Places, Wells and So Forth of Mathurä Maëala

çëuva karuëa-sindho / mathurasya kathä çubhäm
ädau madhu-puré paçya / räja-dhäné su-çobhanam 1
çëuva - please hear; karuëa-sindho - O ocean of mercy; mathurasya - of
Mathurä; kathäm - description; çubhäm - sublime; ädau - in the beginning;
madhu-purém; paçya - behold; räja-dhäném - capital; su-çobhanam - very
beautiful.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Listen, O ocean of mercy, to the sublime description of
Mathurä Maëala. First behold the very beautiful capital of Madhupuré.

triu parisareüccair / durga präcéram uttamam
puryyäù pürvve dakiëäbhimukhe vahati bhänujä 2

[p.543]
triu - in the three; parisareu - sides; uccai - lofty; durgam - inaccesible;
präcéram - wall; uttamam - excellent; puryäù - of the city; pürve - on the east;
dakiëa - south; abhimukhe - towards; vahati - she flows; bhänu-jä - the daughter
of the sun-god, Yamunä.
"Surrounding the city on three sides is an excellent and insumountable wall, and
on its eastern side, the daughter of the sun flows southwards.

uttare dakiëe ca dvau / dvärau ratna-kaväöikau
räja-väöé naite syän / nänä-ratna-vibhüitäm 3
uttare - on the north; dakiëe - on the south; ca - and; dvau - two; dvärau gates; ratna-kaväöikau - jewelled doors; räja-väöém - the king's garden; naite - to
the southwest; syät - let it be; nänä-ratna - by many gems; vibhüitäm ornamented.
"On the northern and southern sides are two large gates equipped with smaller
entrance doors that are composed of jewelled panels. To the southwest lies the
king's garden, the embellishments of which are inlaid with many gems.

pürvvottaräbhyä dvaraiç ca / ratna-yajïai samanvitäm
väöyä uttara-pärçve ca / vedé räjopaveçanäm 4
pürva-uttaräbhyäm - east and north; dvarai - by doors; ca - and ratna - made of
jewels; yajïai - sacrificial; samanvitäm - endowed with; väöyä - of the garden;
uttara-pärçve - on the northern side; ca - and; vedém - raised platform; räjäupaveçanäm - the king's throne.
"On the east and north of the city are entrances with jewelled gates. They are
replete with bejewelled places for performing fire yajïas. On the northern side of
the garden is a dais for the king's throne.

vätavyä khalu puryyäç ca / bandanägäram eva ca

[p.544]
tasyäpi dakiëe mütra-sthäna paçya yathä-sukham 5
vätavyäm - on the northwest; khalu - indeed; puryä - of the city; ca - and;
bandana-agäram - house of bondage (a prison); eva - indeed; ca - and; tasya - of
that; api - also; dakiëe - to the south; mütra-sthänam - the place of urine; paçya please look; yathä-sukham - to your pleasure.
"To the northwest of the city lies the prison, and to its south please observe to
Your satisfaction the place where baby Kåñëa passed urine.

asya vivaraëa vakye / çëu sävahita prabho
kasäd bhéto hi bhagavän / vasudeva udära-dhéù 6
këam ädäya nandasya / goöha gacchan mahä-manäù
jïätvä kroòa-sthita këa / mütrayan sa-tvara mudä 7
aya prastaram äruhya / sthitaù sa ca kaëa prabho
këasya mütra-cihno 'yam / vartate prastaropari 8
asya - of that; vivaraëam - explanation; vakye - I shall speak; çëu - please hear;
sa-avahitam - with attention; prabho - O Master; kasät - from Kasa; bhéta frightened; hi - certainly; bhagavän - the all-opulent; vasudeva - Kåñëa's father;
udära-dhéù - magnanimous; k-ëam - who stops the cycle of birth and death;
ädäya - taking; nandasya - of Nanda; goöham - the cow-barns; gacchan - going;
mahä-manäù - high-minded; jïätvä - knowing; kroòa-sthitam - placed at his
chest; këam - all-attractive; mütrayan - urinating; sa-tvaram - abruptly; mudä with joy; ayam - this; prastaram - rock; äruhya - climbing; sthitaù - placed; sa he; ca - and; kaëam - momentarily; prabho - O Master; këasya - of Kåñëa; mütracihna - the urine mark; ayam - this; vartate - it shines; prastara - of the rock;
upari - on the top.
"I shall give a description of that incident. O Prabhu, please hear it with attention.
Out of fear of Kasa, the magnanimous and noble Vasudeva took the newly born

[p.545]
Kåñëa in his arms and walked towards the cowherd settlement of Nanda. As
Vasudeva held Çré Kåñëa to his chest, he became aware that the baby was urinating.
In a jubilant mood he quickly climbed upon this rock and set Him down for a
moment. O Prabhu, this is the mark of Kåñëa's urine which shines on the top of the
rock.

ata eva janäù sarvve / mütra-sthäna vadanti hi
uddhavasya gha paçya / dakiëe 'sya tad eva tam 9
ata - thus; eva - truly; janäù - people; sarve - all; mütra-sthänam - the place of
urine; vadanti - they call; hi - certainly; uddhavasya - of Uddhava; gham - the
house; paçya - please see; dakiëe - to the south; asya - of this place; tada - then;
iva - like; tam - that.
"Thus all the people call this place Mütra-sthänam or the Place of Urine. Please see
to the south of this spot the house of Uddhava."

çrutvä huìkära kurvvanta / prabhu dövä dvijottamaù
bhétaù kila su-medhäç ca / ktäïjalir uväca ha 10
çrutvä - hearing; huìkäram - roaring sound; kurvantam - making; prabhum the Master; dövä - seeing; dvija-uttamaù - the elevated brähmaëa; bhétaù anxious; kila - certainly; su-medhä - very intelligent; ca - and; kta-aïjali - folded
hands; uväca - said; ha - verily.
Hearing this, the Lord made a thunderous roar. Glancing at Prabhu, the very
intelligent and spiritually advanced brähmaëa became anxious, and with folded
hands addressed Him as follows:

çëuva vacana këa / léläkärin jagad-guro
sthéraù san darçanäd eva / sukham eva bhaved dhruvam 11
çëuva - please hear; vacanam - my words; këa - O Kåñëa; lélä-kärin - O creator
of pastimes; jagat-guro - O spiritual master of all sentient beings; sthéraù -

[p.546]
steady; san - being; darçanät - while seeing; eva - certainly; sukham - happily;
eva - indeed; bhavet - it can be; dhruvam - factually.
"Please hear my words, O Kåñëa! O enactor of divine pleasure-pastimes! O
jagadguru! One who remains sober while taking darçana of the holy places can
indeed achieve true satisfaction.

rajakasya gha paçyoddhavasya gha-pürvvataù
rajakasya ghät pürvve / mäläkära-gha tathä 12
rajakasya - of the washerman; gham - house; paçya - behold; uddhavasya - of
Uddhava; gha-pürvataù - to the east; rajakasya - of the washerman; ghät - from
that house; pürve - to the east; mäläkära-gham - the house of the flower-garland
maker; tathä - also.
"Please see the house of the washerman to the east of Uddhava's house, and to the
east of the washerman's house You can also see the house of the garland-maker.

asyäpi dakiëe kubjä-gha deva-vinirmmitam
kubjäyä naijhate raìga-sthala parama-çobhanam 13
asya - of that; api - also; dakiëe - to the south; kubjä-gham - the house of the
hunch-backed woman; deva-vinirmitam - built by the gods; kubjäyä - of Kubjä;
naijhate - southwest; raìga-sthalam - display arena; parama-çobhanam extremely beautiful.
"To the south of this house is the house of Kubjä, the hunch-backed woman, which
was built by Viçvakarma, and to the southwest of Kubjä's house lies the extremely
beautiful Raìga-sthalam, the wrestling arena.

raìgasthalasyägni-koëe / vasudeva-gha çubham
ugrasena-gha cäsya / caiçänyä vidhinä ktam 14

[p.547]
raìga-sthalasya - of the display arena; agni-koëe - south-east, the quarter of
Agni (the fire-god); vasudeva-gham - the house of Vasudeva; çubham - splendid;
ugrasena-gham - the house of Ugrasena; ca - and; asya - of that; ca - and;
aiçänyäm - north-east, the quarter of Içäna (Çiva); vidhinä - by Vidhi, the
preceptor (Brahmä); ktam - made.
"To the southeast of the Raìga-sthalam lies the splendid house of Vasudeva, and to
the northwest of it stands the house of Ugrasena, built by Lord Brahmä.

asyäpi dakiëe paçya / këa-mürtti gata-çramäm
dtvä tä çré-gaura-candraù / pulakäìgo babhüva ha 15
asya - of that; api - and; dakiëe - to the south; paçya - please behold; këamürtim - the form of Kåñëa; gata-çramäm - free from strife; dtvä - seeing; täm that; çré-gaura-candraù - the Golden Moon; pulaka-aìga - thrill bumps; babhüva became; ha - verily.
"Please see to the south the Deity form of Kåñëa known as Gata-çrama, which
means forever free from anxiety." When Çré Gaura Candra saw that form of Çré
Kåñëa, His body became covered with ecstatic pulakas.

viçräma çrama-çänta ca / kasa-khäléti saìjïakam
prayägam tindu-nämäna / saptari-moka-koöikam 16
bodhi-çiva-gaëeçädi-dvädaça-ghaööa-saìjïakam
kramäd dakiëato jïeya / tértha-räja mahäprabham 17
viçrämam; çrama-çäntam; ca - and; kasa-khäli; iti - thus; saìjïakam - known;
prayägam; tindu; nämänam - of the name; sapta-åi; moka; koöikam; bodhi; çiva;
gaëeça; ädi - headed by; dvädaça-ghaööa - twelve bathing places; saìjïakam known; kramät - in sequence; dakiëata - to the south; jïeyam - known; tértharäjam - the king of térthas; mahä-prabham - very effulgent.

[p.548]
"The twelve extremely effulgent ghaööas or bathing places to the south of the city
are known in sequence by these names: Viçräma, Çrama-çänta, Kasa-khälé, Prayäga,
Tindu, Saptarñi, Mokña, Koöika, Bodhi, Çiva, Gaëeça, and Räjatértha.

püryyäç ca dakiëe raìga-bhümi këa-sukha-pradäm
asyäç ca dakiëe küpa / paçya çré-këa-hetave 18
kasena khanita tena / kasa-küpam itéryyate
asyäpi nairjhate kuëòam / agastyena vinirmitam 19
püryä - of the city; ca - and; dakiëe - on the south; raìga-bhümim - the display
arena; këa-sukha-pradäm - giving joy to Kåñëa; asyä - of that place; ca - and;
dakiëe - to the south; küpam - a well; paçya - please see; çré-këa-hetave - for the
sake of Çré Kåñëa; kasena - by Kasa; khanitam - dug; tena - by him; kasa-küpam the well of Kasa; iti - thus; éryate - it is called; asya - of that; api - also; nairjhate to the southwest; kuëòam - pond; agastyena - by Agastya Muni; vinirmitam made.
"Raìga-bhümi (the sporting arena), which gives pleasure to Çré Kåñëa, lies in the
southern portion of the city. To its south, please see the well dug by Kasa for the
purpose (of throwing) Kåñëa. It is thus known as Käsa Küpa or the well of Kasa. To
the southwest is a kuëa made by Agastya Muni.

puryyäç cottarataù sapta-sämudra-kuëòa-saìjïakam
prastara paçya devakyäù / putra-näçäya nirmitam 20
puryä - of the city; ca - and; uttarataù - to the north; sapta-sämudra - seven
oceans; kuëòa-saìjïakam - the pond known as; prastaram - rock; paçya - see;
devakyäù - of Devaké; putra-näçäya - for the destuction of her sons; nirmitam designed.
"To the north of the city is the kuëa known as Sapta Samudra or Seven Oceans. See
the rock used by Kasa for killing the six sons of Devaké."

[p.549]
kaseneti hasan tanta / punaù präha hasan dvijaù
asyäpy uttarataù paçya / liìga bhüteçvara prabho 21
kasena - by Kasa; iti - thus; hasan - laughing; tantam - shining; punaù - again;
präha - he said; hasan - smiling; dvijaù - the brähmaëa; asya - of that; api - also;
uttarataù - to the north; paçya - see; liìgam - the sacred phallus of Lord Çiva;
bhüta-éçvaram - the controller of all beings; prabho - O Master.
The Lord laughed upon hearing this, and the brähmaëa also laughed and said,
"Prabhu, to the north of this spot You may see Bhüteçvara Liìgam, the form of Lord
Çiva, the master of all living beings.

punaç ca yamunä paçya / sarasvaté-samanvitäm
daçäçvamedha-ghaööa ca / tatraiva soma-térthakam 22
puna - again; ca - and; yamunä; paçya - see; sarasvaté-samanvitäm - joined with
the Sarasvaté; daça-açvamedha - ten horse sacrifices; ghaööam - bathing place; ca and; tatra - there; eva - certainly; soma-térthakam.
"Again behold the Yamunä river, now joined with the Sarasvaté. Here is the
Daçäçvamedha Ghaööa, and there is Soma Tértha.

kaëöhäbharaëa saìjïa ca / näga-térthäbhidhänakam
samyamäkhyaka-kuëòädi puré-prasara-saìkulam 23
kaëöha-äbharaëam - neck ornament; saìjïam - known; ca - and; näga-tértha;
abhidhänakam - called; samyama-äkhyaka - known as Samyama; kuëòa-ädi ponds and so on; puré-prasara - surrounding the city; saìkulam - joined
together.
"Here are the ghaööas named Kaëöhäbharaëa and Näga-tértha, also the kuëas
headed by Samyama, where all the holy rivers combined together and surrounded
the city."

[p.550]
eva pradakiëé-ktvä / mathurä parameçvaraù
bhikä cakära bhikänna / këa-däsa-gåhe sukham 24
evam - thus; pradakiëé-ktvä - circumambulated; mathuräm; parama-éçvaraù the Supreme Lord; bhikäm cakära - accepted alms; bhikä-annam - food accepted
as alms; këa-däsa-gåhe - in the house of Kåñëa Däsa; sukham - happily.
After the Supreme Lord had finished circumambulating Mathurä City, He begged
for bhikñä and happily accepted the prasäda offered to Him in the house of Kåñëa
Däsa.

smtvätha këa-däsena / sevita caraëa-dvayam
çré-këa-paramänanda-mädhuryya kathayan prabhuù 25
smtvä - remembering; atha - then; këa-däsena - by Kåñëa Däsa; sevitam served; caraëa-dvayam - the two feet; çré-këa-parama-änanda - the
transcendentally blissful Çré Kåñëa; mädhurya - sweetness; kathayan - speaking;
prabhuù - the Master.
Then while Kåñëa Däsa served Prabhu's feet, the Lord remembered and spoke of
the sweetness of the transcendentally blissful Lord Çré Kåñëa.

Thus ends the Fourth Sarga entitled "Seeing the Bathing Places, Wells and So
Forth of Mathurä Maëala," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifth Sarga

[p.551]
setu-bandha-sarovara-prasangaù
Visiting Setu-Bandha Sarovara

tataù supto 'pi bhagavän / bhakti-rasa-samanvitaù
utkaëöhitaù këa-lélä / gäyan premäçru-mocayan 1
tataù - then; supta - rested; api - although; bhagavän - the Supreme Lord;
bhakti-rasa-samanvitaù - filled with devotional mellows; utkaëöhitaù - ; këa-léläm
- the pastimes of Kåñëa; gäyan - singing; prema-açru-mocayan - releasing tears of
love.
Having rested, Bhagavän Gaura then sang with great eagerness and open throat
about Çré Kåñëa's pleasure-pastimes. Filled with the mellows of bhakti and great
eagerness, tears of pure love dropped from His eyes.

prati-kaëa pöavän sa / këa-däsa vadasva me
çarvvaré dérghatä präptä / mama duùkha-pradäyiné 2
prati-kaëam - at each moment; pöavän - He inquired; sa - He; këa-däsa - O
Kåñëa Däsa; vadasva me - tell Me; çarvaré - the night; dérghatäm - lengthy; präptä
- endng; mama - for Me; duùkha-pradäyiné - giving sorrow.
From moment to moment He would inquire, "Kåñëa Däsa, tell Me - is this long
night now ended? It is giving Me pain."

sa präha çëu he nätha / mathurä-maëòalasya ca
pramäëa kathyate vijïaiç / catur-açéti-kroçakam 3
sa - he; präha - said; çëu - please hear; he nätha - O Lord; mathurä-maëòalasya of the circle of Mathurä; ca - indeed; pramäëam - the measurement; kathyate - it
is said; vijïai - by the learned; catu-açéti-kroçakam - 84 kroças (168 square
miles).

[p.552]
Kåñëa Däsa would reply, "He Nätha! Hear from me: The length and breadth of
Mathurä Maëala is said by learned men to be 84 kroças.

kramato darçayiyämi / sthira-citto bhavän yadi
bhaviyasi tato mahya / sukha syäd bhakta-vatsala 4
kramata - in sequence; darçayiyämi - I shall show; sthira-citta - steady mind;
bhavän - Your grace; yadi - if; bhaviyasi - You will be; tata - then; mahyam - to
me; sukham - happiness; syät - it can be; bhakta-vatsala - O lover of Your
devotees.
"I shall show it all to You in sequence. Dear Lord! You are famous as bhaktavatsala, for You are very kind to Your bhaktas. If Your Grace can maintain
steadiness of mind, it will bring happiness to this bhakta."

ägatya kuëòottarataù / kiyad düre sarovaram
setu-bandäkhyaka paçya / çré-këena ca nirmitam 5
ägatya - arriving; kuëòa-uttarataù - north of the pond; kiyat - some; düre distance; sara-varam - beautiful lake; setu-banda-äkhyakam - named SetuBandhu, or where the bridge was built; paçya - behold; çré-këena - by Çré Kåñëa;
ca - and; nirmitam - made.
"Some distance to the north of the kuëa, please look upon this reservoir of water
named Setu-Bandha, which was personally created by Çré Kåñëa."

çrutvä sa-vismaya präha / pulakäncita-vigrahaù
asya vivaraëa brühi / këa-däseti sädaram 6
çrutvä - hearing; sa-vismayam - with wonder; präha - He said; pulaka-ancitavigrahaù - form covered by thrill bumps; asya - of this; vivaraëam - description;
brühi - please tell; këa-däsa - O Kåñëa Däsa; iti - thus; sa-ädaram - with respect.

[p.553]
Hearing this with great wonder, Çré Gaura's divine body became covered by
pulakas, and He said respectfully, "O Kåñëa Däsa! Kindly tell Me the story of this
lake."

iti çré-gaura-candrasya / vacana çravaëämtam
piban këam anusmtya / präha prahasitänanaù 7
iti - thus; çré-gaura-candrasya - of Çré Gaura Candra; vacanam - the words;
çravaëa-amtam - the nectar of hearing; piban - drinking; këam - who stops the
repetition of birth and death; anusmtya - remembering through previous
authorities; präha - declared; prahasita-ananaù - with a laughing face.
Quaffing through his ears the ambrosial words of Çré Gaura Candra, and
remembering Çré Kåñëa, Kåñëa Däsa smiled brightly and replied as follows:

ekadä rasika-çekharo harir / gopikä-rasa-vinoda-vinodé
sarasi cätra nava-kuïjara-tulyaù / kréòati raghu-varo 'ham iti
jalpan 8
ekadä - once; rasika-çekhara - the chief of rasikas; hari - the dispeller of evil;
gopikä-rasa - the mellows felt by the milk-maids; vinoda-vinodé - the enjoyer of
the pleasure; sarasi - in the lake; ca - very; atra - here; nava-kuïjara-tulyaù - like
a young elephant; kréòati - He plays; raghu-vara - the best of the Raghu dynasty,
Çré Räma Candra; aham - I; iti - thus; jalpan - talking.
"Çré Hari, the chief among all rasikas, delights in tasting sweet relishable mellows
in the midst of the assembly of gopikäs. Once, while sporting like a young elephant
within this very lake, He announced, `I am Çré Räma Candra, the best of the Raghu
dynasty!'

präha ta ramaëé-çiromaëi-rädhä / gopa-putras tvam asi godhanacäré
satya-dharma-pratipälaka-räjas / tasya karma para-durghaöam eva

[p.554]
9
präha - She said; tam - to Him; ramaëé - amongst lovers; çira-maëi - the crest
jewel; rädhä - Rädhä; gopa-putra - the son of a cowherd; tvam - You; asi - are; godhana - with a wealth of cows; cäré - wanderer; satya-dharma - the virtue and
truthfulness; pratipälaka - protector; räja - the king; tasya - his; karma - work;
para-durghaöam - very difficult for others; eva - indeed.
"Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the crest-jewel of all charming goddesses, responded, `You are
only a cow-herd's son. Indeed, You wander about tending his herds of cows. A king
is the protector of truth and virtue. His task is certainly a very difficult one for
others to attempt.'

sindhu-bandhana-rävaëa-näçanam / etad eva hi tasya su-çobhanam
mä kuru nija-guëa-prakäçana / bälikä-vasana-bhüaëa-caura 10
sindhu - ocean; bandhana - bridging; rävaëa-näçanam - destroying Rävaëa; etat this; eva - indeed; hi - certainly; tasya - His; su-çobhanam - very glorious; mä not; kuru - do; nija-guëa-prakäçanam - broadcast Your own glories; bälikä - of
young girls; vasana - of garments; bhüaëa - of ornaments; caura - O thief.
"`To destroy the demon Rävaëa, Çré Räma Candra built a bridge to Laìkä. That was
certainly a very glorious achievement. Don't venture to broadcast Your own qualities
and compare Yourself to Him, for You are nothing but a thief of the clothes and
ornaments of young girls!'

këa äha parama-kautaka-räçir / häsya-kautuka-rasaika-viläsé
sarvva-sad-guëa-nidhir aham eva / jänéhéti tvam asi gopa-kumäré 11
këa - all-attractive; äha - said; parama-kautaka - supreme pranks; räçi - series;
häsya - laughter; kautuka - jest-filled; rasa - mellows; eka - exclusive; viläsé enjoyer; sarva - all; sat-guëa - fine qualities; nidhi - treasure; aham - I; eva indeed; jänéhi - You should know; iti - thus; tvam - You; asi - You are; gopakumäré - the daughter of a cowherd.

[p.555]
"Then Çré Kåñëa, who is the master-mind of uncountable transcendental pranks
and the exclusive enjoyer of mischievous rasa-imbued jests, replied to Rädhä, `I am
an exquisite jewel of all sublime qualities, and this You know very well, for You are
a cowherd's daughter!

vka-parvvata-mahä-dhana-bäëaiù / prastarä yadi kadäpi na
plavyäù
tarhi sarvva-guëa-ratna-sameta / paçyata bhäva-nidhe 'pi
prabhävam 12
vka - trees; parvata - mountain; mahä-dhana - great abundance; väëaiù - by
weaving; prastarä - couches of leaves and flowers; yadi - if; kadäpi - at any time;
na - not; plavyäù - floating; tarhi - since; sarva-guëa-ratna - all jewel-like
qualities; sametam - assembled; paçyata - just see; bhäva-nidhe - O ocean of
ecstasy; api - although; prabhävam - influence.
"`If someone were to take the great abundance of rocks and trees from the
mountains and weave them together upon the water, they could never float. Still, O
source of My ecstasy! You may now witness a demonstration of the power of My
host of sublime jewel-like qualities!'

çrutvä sarvväù parama-rasikä rädhikä-väkya-säram
baddhvä hy aìga parama-rabhasät prastarädén sva-sakhyaù

äninyus täù sa-taru-nicayän tena baddha kta tat
paçyantyäs täù sa-jaya-dhvanibhis ta praëamyäçaçasuù 13

çrutvä - hearing; sarväù - all; parama-rasikä - topmost experts of rasa; rädhikäväkya-säram - the essence of Rädhä's words; baddhvä - tying together; hi indeed; aìgam - their bodies; parama-rabhasät - out of supreme enthusiasm;
prastara-ädén - the rocks and so on; sva-sakhyaù - Her friends; äninyu- they
brought; täù - they; sa-taru-nicayän - with all the trees; tena - by Him; baddham bound; ktam - done; tat - that; paçyantyä - looking on; täù - they; sa-jayadhvanibhi - with cries of "All glories!"; tam - to Him; praëamya - bowing down;

[p.556]
praçaçasuù - they praised.
"All of Rädhä's sakhés are the topmost rasikäs, and understood the inner meaning
of Rädhikä's words, Enthusiastically forming a line and they brought many rocks,
trees and so forth from the forest. Çré Kåñëa used these to form a bridge that floated
upon the water of this kuëa, and as everyone looked upon the scene, they bowed
down and glorified Him with utterances of `Jaya! Jaya!'

çré-rädhä-këa-lélä parama-madhurä häsya-rasädi-prayuktä
* * * gopikäbhir jayati ca parama santata-prema-pürëä

yä * * * çrutväpi parama-rasikäs tau smareyuù sukhena
jïänänanda hasantaù sa-rabhasam akhila mokam apy äkipanti 14

çré-rädhä-këa - of the original youthful Couple; lélä - the pastimes; paramamadhurä - extremely relishable; häsya-rasa-ädi - by the mellows headed by the
mellow of laughter; prayuktä - imbued; gopikäbhi - with the milk-maids; jayati glories!; ca - and; paramam - zenith; santata-prema-pürëä - forever filled by love;
yäm - whom; çrutvä - hearing; api - indeed; parama-rasikä - topmost rasikas; tau
- those two (Rädhä and Kåñëa); smareyuù - they remember; sukhena - with glad
hearts; jïäna-änanda - the happiness of transcendental knowledge; hasantaù laughing; sa-rabhasam - without a qualm; akhilam - entirely; mokam - liberation;
api - even; äkipanti - deride.
"The pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa in the company of their gopé friends are
imbued with the zenith of relishable rasa, always beginning with the rasa of comedy.
All glories to those pleasure-pastimes, which are forever filled with the
uninterrupted ever-expanding flow of Their divine prema! The topmost rasikas who
hear of these pastimes and thus remember the Divine Couple simply laugh at the
idea of achieving happiness through mere transcendental knowledge, and without a
qualm they utterly ridicule the thought of liberation."
[* words lost from original manuscript.]

etad gaura-hariù këa-rahasya paramädbhutam
çrutvä rädhä-rasäveço / nanartta vivaça mudä 15

[p.557]
etat - this; gaura-hariù - the golden Lord; këa-rahasyam - the confidential
pastimes of Kåñëa; parama-adbhutam - very astonishing; çrutvä - hearing; rädhärasa-äveça - immersed in the mellow of Rädhä; nanarta - He danced; vivaçam uncontrollably; mudä - in gladness.
Hearing this most astounding and confidential narration of Çré Kåñëa-lélä, Çré
Gaura Hari became immersed in the ecstatic moods of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, and He
danced in joyful abandon.

Thus ends the Fifth Sarga entitled "Visiting Setu-Bandha Sarovara," in the
Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Sixth Sarga
mahävana-ädi-darçanam
Gauräìga Sees Mahävana and Other Forests

eva saìkathayan vipro / bhänujä prabhuëä samam
uttéryya darçayäm äsa / nanda-geha mahä-vanam 1
evam - thus; saìkathayan - narrating; vipraù - learned brähmaëa; bhänu-jäm daughter of the sungod, Yamunä; prabhuëä samam - with Prabhu; uttérya having crossed; darçayäm äsa - showed; nanda-geham - the house of King
Nanda; mahä-vanam - the great forest.
After narrating this history, the learned brähmaëa Kåñëa Däsa accompanied by
Gaura Prabhu crossed the Yamunä, daughter of the sun, and showed Him the house
of Nanda Mahäräja in Mahävana.

[p.558]
pütanä-mocaëa cätra / çakaöasya vimocanam
tëävarttasya durvtter / hariëätra kto vadhaù 2
pütanä-mocaëam - liberation of Pütanä; ca - and; atra - here; çakaöasya - of the
cart demon; vimocanam - deliverance; durvtteù - of the wicked being; hariëä - by
Hari; atra - here; ktaù - done; vadhaù - killing.
"Here the witch Pütanä received liberation, here the cart-demon was delivered, and
here Çré Hari slew the miscreant Tåëävarta.

jbhamäëena këena / codare viçvam adbhutam
darçitam atra mätre sä / bhétäpy äçiam ädadau 3
jbhamäëena - by the yawning; këena - by Kåñëa; ca - and; udare - in the belly;
viçvam - universe; adbhutam - amazing; darçitam - showed; mätre - to His
mother; sä - she; bhétä - frightened; api - very; äçiam - blessing; ädadau received.
"At this spot, Kåñëa opened His mouth wide and showed His mother the amazing
spectacle of the universe within His belly. Although Yaçodä became very frightened,
still she offered heartfelt blessings to her son.

atraiva näma-karaëa / gargena vihita kila
mttikä-bhakaëa cätra / viçva-rüpa-pradarçanam 4
atra - here; eva - indeed; näma-karaëam - name-giving ceremony; gargena - by
Garga Muni; vihitam - performed; kila - indeed; måttikä - dirt; bhakñaëam eating; ca - and; atra - here; viçva-rüpa - universal form; pradarçanam - showing.
"Here Garga Muni performed Gopäla's name-giving ceremony, and here Kåñëa ate
dirt and displayed another vision of the universal form.

dadhi-manthana-daëòam hi / dhtavän hi hariù svayam

[p.559]
mät-haräya bhagavän / narttitum hy upacakrame 5
dadhi - yogurt; manthana - churning; daëòam - rod; hi - surely; dhtavän - held;
hi - certainly; hariù - He who takes away all inauspiciousness; svayam - Himself;
mät-haräya - for the pleasure of His mother; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord;
nartitum - to dance; hi - surely; upacakrame - attempted.
"This is the rod for churning yogurt that Yaçomati-nandana Bhagavän Hari held
while trying to dance for the pleasure of His mother.

yaçodä ta kroòe ktvä / hasanté vékya tan-mukham
stana sampäyayäm äsa / kautühala-samanvitä 6
yaçaù-dä - the giver of fame, Kåñëa's mother; tam - her; kroòe - on the breast;
ktvä - did; hasanté - laughing; vékya - seeing; tat-mukham - His face; stanam breast; sampäyayäm äsa - she made drink; kautühala - love; samanvitä - filled
with.
"Laughing to see His face, Yaçodä took Kåñëa to her breast and, filled with love,
made Him drink her milk.

dugdham uttäpana vékya / ta sthäpya sa-tvara saté
cullé-stha dugdham uttäryya / päyän manthana-sasthitam 7
dugdham - milk; uttäpanam - boiling over; vékya - seeing; tam - Him; sthäpya having placed; sa-tvaram - quickly; saté - chaste lady; cullé-stham - on the fire;
dugdham - milk; uttärya - brought down; päyät - for the sake of the milk;
manthana-sasthitam - situated by the churning rod.
"Then seeing the milk boiling over on the fire, that chaste lady quickly put Him
down and went to take the boiling milk off the stove. Then she returned to the
butter-churner.

[p.560]
këo 'pi krodhena samanvitaù svaya / bhäëòa ca bhittvädçad açmanä
kila
gha praviöo navanétaka cäpy / açitvolükhaläìghry-upari-sthito
'hasat 8
këaù - the all-attractive; api - very; krodhena - on account of anger; samanvitaù
- filled with; svayam - spontaneously; bhäëòam - pot; ca - and; bhittvä - broken;
adçat - He saw; açmanä - with a stone; kila - indeed; gham - house; praviöaù entered; nava-nétakam - fresh butter; ca - and; api - also; açitvä - eating; ulükhala
- grinding mortar; aìghri - foot; upari - above; sthitaù - situated; ahasat laughed.
"Meanwhile, Kåñëa became angry and, seeing a pot of butter, broke it with a piece
of stone. Entering the house, He stood upon the wooden grinding mortar while
eating the fresh butter and laughing.

tato yaçodä sva-sutasya karma tat / praläpita cäpi hasantam uhya
babandha dämnä tam ato hi nämnä / damodarätraiva babhüva
prema-daù 9
tataù - then; yaçodä - Yaçodä-mayé; sva-sutasya - of her son; karma - deed; tat that; praläpitam - lamentation; ca - and; api - also; hasantam - laughing; uhya having brought; babandha - bound; dämnä - with a rope; tam - Him; ataù therefore; hi - certainly; nämnä - by the name; däma-udara - He whose belly is
bound; atra - here; eva - indeed; babhüva - became; prema-daù - the bestower of
love.
"By the marks of Kåñëa's activities, Yaçodä guessed what her son had done and
hearing his prattling and laughter, she caught Him and bound His belly (udara) with
ropes (däma) in this very spot. For this reason, the giver of prema is now known by
the name of Dämodara.

dämodaro 'tra bhagavän / babhaïja yamalärjjunau

[p.561]
dhänya datvä phala cätra / babhuje phaladeçvaraù 10
dämodaraù - Lord Dämodara; atra - then; bhagavän - Supreme Lord; babhaïja broke; yamala - twin; arjunau - two arjuna trees; dhänyam - grains; phalam fruits; ca - and; atra - here; babhuje - enjoyed; phala-da - giver of fruits; éçvaraù Supreme Controller.
"Then at this placethat Bhagavän Dämodara broke the twin arjuna trees. Over here
the Lord offered grains to a lady-peddler in exchange for some fruits and ate them,
even though He is Himself the ultimate bestower of all fruits.

asya dakiëa-pärçve ca / golokäkhyas tu gokulam
bälya-lélä hi mäträpi / hy akarod atha sa hariù 11
asya - of this place; dakiëa-pärçve - on the southern side; ca - and; golokaakhyaù - called Goloka; tu - but; gokulam - the place of the cowherds; bälyaléläm - boyhood pastimes; hi - indeed; mäträ - with His mother; api - also; hi certainly; akarot - performed; atha - thus; saù - He; hariù - Lord Hari.
"On the southern side of this place is Gokula, known by those in knowledge as
Goloka. In this very place, Çré Hari performed His childhood pastimes in the
company of His mother.

gopeçvara devam atra / paçya sarvveçvareçvara
sapta-sämudraka kuëòam / atra bhuvana-pävanam 12
gopa-éçvaram devam - Lord of the cowherds; atra - here; paçya - just see; sarvaéçvara-éçvara - controller of all controllers; sapta-sämudrakam - the seven
oceans; kuëòam - pond; atra - here; bhuvana-pävanam - the purifier of the
worlds.
"O controller of all controllers, here You may see Gopeçvara-deva. And here is
Sapta-Sämudra Kuëòa, which purifies all the worlds.

[p.562]
äyänasya gha gräme / paçcime rasa-pürvvakam
änandäkhyo gopako 'py / avasat tasyäpi dakiëe 13
äyänasya - of the gopa _yäna; gham - house; gräme - in the town; paçcime - to
the west; rasa-pürvakam - filled with rasa; änanda-äkhyo - named änanda;
gopakaù - cowherd; api - verily; avasat - dwelt; tasya - his; api - also; dakiëe - to
the south.
"In the town to the west of this place stands the home of the gopa named _yäna,
husband of Çrématé Rädhäräëé, which is an abode filled with rasa. To the south, the
cowherd named _nanda also dwelt.

upananda-gha gräma-madhye këa-sukha-pradam
asya paçcima-bhäge ca / rävaëasya tapovanam 14
upananda-gham - the house of Upananda; gräma - the town; madhye - in the
midst; këa-sukha-pradam - bestower of happiness to Kåñëa; asya - of this place;
paçcima-bhäge - in the western side; ca - and; rävaëasya - of Rävaëa; tapaùvanam - forest of penance.
"In the midst of this town is the house of Upananda, where Kåñëa took much
pleasure. On the western side of the town is the forest where Rävaëa performed
austerities.

durvväsaso muneù këa / äçrama hy uttare 'sya ca
asyäpi nikaöe loha-vana bilva-vana prabho 15
durväsasaù muneù - of the sage Durväsa; këa - O Kåñëa; äçramam - the place
for spiritual culture; hi - certainly; uttare - to the north; asya - of this place; ca and; asya - of this place; api - also; loha-vanam - red forest; bilva-vanam - forest
of bilva trees; prabho - O Master.
"O Kåñëa! To the north of this spot lies the äçrama of Durväsa Muni. Nearby, O

[p.563]
Prabhu, are the forests of Lohavana and Bilvavana.

aträpi paçya nandasya / këa kréòayataù sukham
bälya-lélä-rasa tasmai / dadäti paramädbhutam 16
atra - here; api - also; paçya - just see; nandasya - of Nanda Mahäräja; këam the all-attractive Lord; kréòayataù - made many games; sukham - joyously; bälyalélä-rasam - the boyhood mellows; tasmai - to him; dadäti - He gives; paramaadbhutam - very wonderful.
"Here also You may see the spot where Nanda Mahäräja's son Kåñëa happily
played many games. Kåñëa awarded to Nanda the very wonderful rasa of His
boyhood pastimes.

meghägama ca dövä sa / nanda äha su-gopikäm
këam ädäya mad-geheçvaryyai çéghra samarpaya 17
megha - clouds; ägamam - coming; ca - and; dövä - having seen; saù - he; nanda
- Nanda Räjä; äha - said; su-gopikäm - to a nice gopé; këam - Çré Kåñëa; ädäya taking; mat-geha - my house; éçvaryai - to the queen; çéghram - quickly;
samarpaya - please bring.
"Observing the approach of some storm clouds, King Nanda said to a nice gopé,
`Quickly take baby Kåñëa to the queen of my home.'

säpi ta sväìkam äropyäcumbya cänanda-vihvalä
gäòham äliìgitä tena vismitä vivaçäbhavat 18
sä api - that very lady; tam - Him; sva-aìkam - in Her own lap; äropya - having
placed; äcumbya - having kissed all over; ca - and; änanda-vihvalä overwhelmed by joy; gäòham - deeply; äliìgitä - embraced; tena - by Him;
vismitä - astonished; vivaça - helpless; abhavat - became.

[p.564]
"That lady placed Him on her lap and, feeling overwhelmed with joy, kissed Him
all over. Being warmly embraced by Him, she became amazed and utterly captivated
by that child."

çrutvä këa-rasolläsa / bälakasyaiva vaibhavam
gaura-këaù këa-däsa / premnäliìgitavän svayam 19
çrutvä - hearing; këa-rasa - mellows of Kåñëa; ulläsam - shining; bälakasya - of
the boy; eva - surely; vaibhavam - glories; gaura-këaù - Kåñëa with a golden
complexion; këa-däsam - Kåñëa Däsa; premnä - by love; äliìgitavän - embraced;
svayam - spontaneously.
After hearing about the shining rasa of Çré Kåñëa's childhood pastimes and
transcendental glories, Gaura Kåñëa gave a heart-felt loving embrace to Kåñëa Däsa.

atra paçya ca govinda / gopäla-carita-çubham
go-cäraëa-gatenätra / kuëòa ca hariëä ktam 20
atra - here; paçya - just see; ca - also; govinda - O Govinda; gopäla-caritaçubham - the sublime character of Gopäla; go-cäraëa - cow-tending; gatena - by
taking to; atra - here; kuëòam - pond; ca - and; hariëä - by Hari; ktam - done.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "He Gaura-Govinda! Just see! Here Gopäla enacted the
sublime pastime of tending the cows. And here is the kuëa dug by Çré Hari.

atraiva copanando 'pi / nandam ähüya sundaraù
gopaiù parivto yukti / ktvä këa-sukhäya ca 21
atra - here; eva - surely; ca - and; upananda - when Upananda; api - indeed;
nandam - King Nanda; ähüya - called; sundaraù - handsome; gopaiù - by the
cowherds; parivtaù - surrounded; yuktim - proper; ktvä - doing; këa-sukhäya for the welfare of Kåñëa; ca - and.

[p.565]
"In this place, the handsome Upananda was surrounded by the other cowherds as
he addressed Nanda in order to determine the proper course of action for the
welfare of baby Kåñëa.

sa-vrajaù çakaöam äruhya / räma-këa-samanvitaù
yayau bhadraka-bhäëòéra / dvau mäsau tatra cävasat 22
sa-vrajaù - Nanda, with the community of cowherds; çakaöam - carts; äruhya mounting; räma-këa-samanvitaù - together with Räma and Kåñëa; yayau - he
went; bhadraka-bhäëòéram - to the forests of Bhadraka and Bhäëòéra; dvau
mäsau - for two months; tatra - there; ca - and; avasat - dwelt.
"Together with the cowherd men, their wives, children and cows, Nanda Mahäräja
mounted a cart and travelled to the forests of Bhadraka and Bhäëéra. There they
dwelt for two months."

Thus ends the Sixth Sarga entitled "Gauräìga Sees Mahävana and Other
Forests," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Seventh Sarga
vastra-haraëa-ädi-lélä-sthalé-darçanam
A Vision of the Site where Çré Kåñëa Stole the Gopés' Garments,
and Other Holy Places

ataç ca yamunä-päre / vndäraëya sanätanam
tatra nandädayo gopä / väsa cakrur atandritäù 1
ataù - then; ca - and; yamunä-päre - on the far shore of Yamunä; vndä-araëyam

[p.566]
- the forest of Våndä; sanätanam - eternal; tatra - there; nanda-ädayaù - Nanda
and the others; go-päù - the cow protectors; väsam - residence; cakruù - made;
atandritäù - industrious.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Then, on the far shore of Yamunä, where the forest of
Våndävana exists eternally, Nanda and the other cowherds busily erected dwelling
places.

paçyätra çakaöair durga / kta piträdibhir vtau
räma-këau khelataç ca / go-gopäla-janaiù saha 2
paçya - just see; atra - here; çakaöaiù - with the carts; durgam - fort; ktam made; pitra-ädibhiù - by the fathers; vtau - surrounded; räma-këau - Räma and
Kåñëa; khelataù - they played; ca - and; go-gopäla-janaiù - with the cows and
cowherds; saha - with.
"Behold this spot where the fathers and other men had created a fort out of the
carts. Surrounded by the carts, Räma and Kåñëa played with the cows and cowherds.

kapittha-müle 'tra janärddanena / vadhaù kto vatsaka-rüpadhäriëaù
vatsäsurasya baka-veça-dhäriëo / bakäsuräsyäpi ca gaura-candra 3
kapittha-müle - at the root of the kapittha tree; atra - here; jana-ardanena - by
the Lord who thrills the hearts of people; vadhaù - killing; ktaù - done; vatsakarüpa - form of a calf; dhäriëaù - taking on; vatsa-asurasya - of the demon
appearing as a calf; baka-veça - appearance of a crane; dhäriëaù - taking on; bakaasurasya - of Baka-asura; api - indeed; ca - and; gaura-candra - O Golden Moon.
"O Golden Moon! Here at the root of a kapittha tree, Çré Janärdana slew Vatsäsura,
the demon who took the form of a calf, as well as Bakäsura, the demon who took the
form of a crane.

[p.567]
atraiva çré-räma-janärddanau ca / sa-veëu-veträdi-yutaiù sakhéjanaiù
cikréòatur vänara-paka-saìkulair / mayüra-kekädi-rutair jagat-paté
4
atra - here; eva - truly; çré-räma-janärdanau - Çré Räma and Janärdana; sa-veëu with flutes; vetra-ädi - sticks and so on; yutaiù - equipped with; sakhé-janaiù with the friends; cikréòatuù - they played; vänara-paka - groups of monkeys;
saìkulaiù - with crowds; mayüra - peacocks; keka-ädi - calls and so on; rutaiù resounding; jagat-paté - the protectors of the universe.
"In this place, Räma and Janärdana, the protectors of the cosmic manifestation,
equipped with flutes, sticks and other cowherd paraphernalia, played with their
boyfriends, imitating the activities of the throngs of monkeys and the resounding
cries and movements of the peacocks."

çrutvä svaya këa-rasena pürëaù / çré-bhakta-rüpo rasikendra-maulé
pürvväparäbhyä viayäçrayävto / lélä-rasäbhyä prabhu-gauracandraù 5
çrutvä - having heard; svayam - spontaneously; këa-rasena - with the mellows
of Kåñëa; pürëaù - filled; çré-bhakta-rüpa - the sacred form of a devotee; rasikaindra-maulé - the chief of all those expert in relishing rasa; pürva-aparäbhyäm with former and later; viaya - object; äçraya - subject; avtaù - embued; lélärasäbhyäm - with pastime and mellow; prabhu - Master; gaura-candraù - Lord
like a Golden Moon.
Hearing these desriptions, Gaura Hari, the crest jewel among all rasikas, who had
accepted the form of an exemplary devotee, became wholly saturated with Kåñëarasa. In His former lélä, Gaura Candra Prabhu was imbued with the rasa of viñayatattva, or the absolute truth as the object of transcendental love. Whereas in His
present lélä, He is imbued with the rasa of äçraya-tattva, or the absolute truth as the
subject of that love.

[p.568]
atra paçya ca gauräìga / sarpa-rüpa-dharo 'py aghaù
bakänujo mahä-päpaù / präptas ta cähanad dhariù 6
atra - here; paçya - just see; ca - and; gauräìga - O Golden Lord; sarpa-rüpa the form of a snake; dharaù - taking; api - indeed; aghaù - the demon of
personified sin; baka-anujaù - the younger brother of Baka; mahä-päpaù - very
sinful; präptaù - accepted; tam - him; ca - and; ahanat - killed; hariù - Lord Hari.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "O Gauräìga! Behold the place where the immensely sinful
demon Agha, the younger brother of Baka, assumed the form of a python and was
slain by Çré Hari.

sva-janaiù sakhibhiç cätra / dövä bhojana-kautukam
svayambhür vatsara vatsa-sva-janäpaharo 'bhavat 7
sva-janaiù - with His intimates; sakhibhiù - with His friends; ca - and; atra here; dövä - having seen; bhojana - luncheon; kautukam - enthusiastic; svayambhüù - self-born Brahmä; vatsaram - one year; vatsa - calves; sva-jana - of His
friends; apaharaù - theft; abhavat - it took place.
"At this spot, when Brahmä saw the festive luncheon taking place amongst Kåñëa
and His intimate boyfriends, he stole away the calves and boys for one year.

dhenukasya vadha cätra / kpayäsya vimocanam
käléya-damana cätra / hrada paçya su-nirmmalam 8
dhenukasya - of the ass-demon; vadham - killing; ca - and; atra - here; kpayä by the mercy; asya - of Kåñëa; vimocanam - liberation; käléya-damanam subuing of the Käléya serpent; atra - here; hradam - lake; paçya - just see; sunirmalam - very pure.
"In this place the ass-demon was slain, and by Kåñëa's mercy he received liberation

[p.569]
from material bondage. Look at this crystal-clear lake. Here Lord Govinda subdued
the great snake named Käléya.

käléya-damané cätra / mürté paçya jagad-guro
çétärtta-cchalataù këa / utthito 'tra jaläd bahiù 9
käléya-damaném - the subduer of Käléya; ca - and; atra - here; mürtém - Deity;
paçya - just see; jagat-guro - O spiritual master of the universe; çéta - cold; ärta afflicted; çalataù - shaking; këa - O Kåñëa; utthitaù - arose.
"O spiritual preceptor of the world, behold the Deity form of the subduer of Käléya.
When Kåñëa rose out of the lake, He was shivering, being pained by the cold water.

atra vai dvädaçädityä / utthitä gaganopari
dvädaçäditya-ghaööo 'ya / kathyate veda-päragaiù 10
atra - here; jalät - from the water; bahiù - outside; atra - here; vai - truly;
dvädaça - twelve; ädityäù - suns; utthitäù - arose; gagana - sky; uparim - above;
dvädaça-äditya-ghaööaù - the bathing place named after the twelve suns; ayam this; kathyate - it is told; veda-päragaiù - by those fully conversant in the Vedas.
"Thus at this place, twelve suns rose in the sky to give Kåñëa warmth. Therefore,
those who are conversant in the Vedas call this place Dvädaçäditya-ghaööa, or `the
Bathing Place of the Twelve Suns.'

atraiva vatsa-pälänä / dävägneù parimocanam
kta nanda-kumäreëa / bhakta-duùkhäpahäriëä 11
atra - here; eva - factually; vatsa-pälänäm - of the boys protecting calves; däväagneù - of the forest fire; parimocanam - complete freedom; ktam - done; nandakumäreëa - by the son of Nanda; bhakta-duùkha - grief of the devotees;
apahäriëä - by one who relieves.

[p.570]
"At this spot, while the boys of Vraja were engaged in protecting the calves, Nanda
Kumära delivered them unharmed from the flames of a forest-fire. He did this
because He is celebrated for His promise to relieve His bhakta from all distress.

kréòä-paräjitaù këaù / çrédäma-näma bälakam
uväha parama-prétaù / pralambo rohiëé-sutam 12
kréòä - play; paräjitaù - defeated; këaù - the all-attractive Person; çrédämanäma bälakam - the boy named Çrédäman; uväha - He carried; parama-prétaù with great love; pralambaù - the demon Pralamba; rohiëé-sutam - the son of
Rohiëé (Balaräma).
"When Kåñëa was defeated in play, out of great love He carried His boyfriend
Çrédäman on His shoulders, and the demon Pralambäsura carried the son of Rohiëé.

jïätväsura punaù so 'pi / muöé-ktya karämbujam
çirasy atäòayat tasya / so 'patad gata-jévitaù 13
jïätvä - knowing; asuram - demon; punaù - again; saù - He; api - indeed; muöéktya - making a fist; kara-ambujam - lotus hand; çirasi - on the head; atäòayat He struck; tasya - his; saù - he; apatat - he fell down; gata-jévitaù - his life gone.
"Realizing that this cowherd boy was actually a demon in disguise, Balaräma made
a fist with His lotus hand and struck Pralamba on the head. His life departed from
his body and the demon fell to the ground.

bhäëòéräkhya vaöa vndäraëye paçya mahattamam
éikäkhya-vana hy atra / go-dhana tëa-lobhitam 14
bhäëòéra-äkhyam - named Bhäëéra; vaöam - banyan; vndä-araëye - in the forest
of Våndä; paçya - just see; mahattamam - the greatest; éika-äkhya-vanam - the
forest named I~çika; atra - here; go-dhanam - the wealth of the cow-protectors,

[p.571]
cows; tëa-lobhitam - eager for grass.
"See the great banyan tree named Bhäëéra in Våndäraëya. And here is the forest of
reeds known as I~ñikä-vana. There the cows, the wealth of the cowherds, once
entered, being eager for new grasses.

praviöa veëu-nädena / këenänétam apy uta
dävänale madhya-ga ca / sva-gaëa vékya çré-hariù 15
papau kara-talé-ktyänala bhakta-jana-priyaù
paçya cätra rasa-jïena / çré-këena kta hi yat 16
praviöam - entered; veëu-nädena - accompanied by the sound of the flute;
këena - by Kåñëa; änétam - led; api - however; uta - indeed; dävä-anale - in a
forest fire; madhya-gam - gone in the midst; ca - and; sva-gaëam - His own herd;
vékya - seeing; çré-hariù - thief of the mind; papau - drank; kara-talé-ktya cupping His hands; analam - fire; bhakta-jana-priyaù - one who holds dear His
devotees; paçya - just see; ca - and; atra - here; rasa-jïena - by He who is wise in
relationships; çré-këena - by Çré Kåñëa; ktam - done; hi - indeed; yat - which.
"Led by the sound of Kåñëa's flute, the cows entered the heart of the forest.
However, they found themselves surrounded by a forest-fire. Seeing His own herd
endangered, Çré Hari, who is affectionate to His devotees, cupped His hands and
drank the fire. Behold the spot where Çré Kåñëa performed this wonderful deed.

tam eva patim icchantyo / vrata ceruù kumärikäù
atraiva yamunä-tére / vasträbharaëa-rakitäù 17
tam - Him; eva - assuredly; patim - husband; icchantyaù - desiring; vratam - a
vow; ceruù - performed; kumärikäù - maidens; atra eva - in this very spot;
yamunä-tére - on the bank of the Yamunä; vastra-äbharaëa - dresses and
ornaments; rakitäù - kept carefully.

[p.572]
"Desiring to get Kåñëa as their husband, the young maidens of Våndävana practiced
an austere vow. In this place on the bank of the Yamunä they carefully kept their
dresses and ornaments before bathing.

viçantyo jalam evaitäs / tato nägara-çekharaù
ädäya täsä vasträëi / népam äruhya sa-tvaraù 18
viçantyaù - entered; jalam - the water; eva - verily; etäù - they; tataù - then;
nägara-çekharaù - the crest amongst paramours; ädäya - took; täsäm - their;
vasträëi - garments; népam - a kadamba tree; äruhya - mounting; sa-tvaraù - with
speed.
"When they entered the water, the crest-jewel of all paramours snatched their
garments and speedily climbed into a kadamba tree.

hasati säkhibhiù särddha / tatas täù çéta-vepitäù
këa santoayäm äsuù / çuddha-bhävena bhävitäù 19
hasati - He joked; säkhibhiù - with the friends; särdham - with; tataù - then; täù
- they; çéta-vepitäù - shivering from cold; këam - Kåñëa; santoayäm äsuù - they
pleased; çuddha-bhävena - by their pure consciouness; bhävitäù - absorbed in
thoughts.
"Then Çré Kåñëa spoke jestingly, teasing the gopés who were shivering in the cold
water of the Yamunä. Finally they received back their dresses after pleasing the Lord
by their pure consciousness and innocent demeanor.

çré-rämeëa samam këas / tam uddeçya vanaspatén
vndäraëya-sthitän atra / praçasan yamunä gataù 20
çré-rämeëa - with Çhré Räma; samam - with; këaù - Kåñëa; tam - Him; uddeçya pointing out the worthy qualities; vanaspatén - the trees; vndä-araëya-sthitän situated in the forest of Våndä; atra - here; praçasan - praising; yamunäm -

[p.573]
Yamunä river; gataù - went.
"Thereafter in the company of Çré Räma, Kåñëa pointed out the worthy qualities of
the trees of Våndäraëya. After praising them, they bathed in Yamunä.

tato 'tra vipra-patnébhyaç / cännam ädäya yajïa-bhuk
bubhuje bälakaiù särddha / balenäpi baléyasä 21
tataù - then; atra - here; vipra-patnébhyaù - from the wives of the learned
brähmaëas; ca - and; annam - food; ädäya - taking; yajïa-bhuk - the enjoyer of
sacrifice; bubhuje - enjoyed; bälakaiù särdham - with the boys; balena - with
Balaräma; api - also; baléyasä - with the strongest.
"Here the enjoyer of all sacrifice accepted gifts of food from the wives of learned
brähmaëa. He enjoyed them with mighty Balaräma and the cowherd boys."

Thus ends the Seventh Sarga entitled "A Vision of the Site where Çré Kåñëa
Stole the Gopés' Garments, and Other Holy Places," in the Fourth Prakrama of
the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Eighth Sarga
çré-govarddhana-ädi-darçanam
Darçana of Govardhana Hill and Other Holy Places

punaç ca kasa-bhétena / sammantrya sva-janaiù saha
nandéçvare niväsaç ca / cakre nandena sa-vrajam 1
punaù - again; ca - and; kasa-bhétena - due to fear of Kasa; sammantrya -

[p.574]
inviting; sva-janaiù - by his people; saha - with; nandéçvare - on the hill named
Nandéçvara; niväsaù - abode; ca - and; cakre - made; nandena - by Nanda; savrajam - with the cowherd community.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Again due to fear of Kasa, Mahäräja Nanda consulted with
his people and thus the community of cowherds made their new abode on
Nandéçvara hill.

govarddhana-girau ramye / manaù svarga-nadé-taöe
nitya viharataù këa-rämau sakhi-samanvitau 2
govardhana-girau - on the hill of Govardhana; ramye - on the charming;
manaù-svarga-nadé - Mänasa-Gaìgä; taöe - on the bank; nityam - daily; viharataù enjoyed; këa-rämau - Kåñëa and Räma; sakhi-samanvitau - with their friends.
"Every day Kåñëa and Räma enjoyed with their friends on the banks of Mänasi
Gaìgä near charming Govardhana Hill.

indra-garvva-niräsärtha / sapta-varo hariù kila
giri dadhära hareëa / svänä rakä vicintayan 3
indra - Lord Indra; garva - pride; niräsa - driving out; artham - with the
purpose; sapta-varaù - seven years old; hariù - the remover of sin; kila - indeed;
girim - hill; dadhära - held; hareëa - with joy; svänäm - of His own people;
rakäm - protection; vicintayan - considering.
"In order to drive out the pride from the heart of Indradeva, Çré Hari, at the age of
seven, cheerfully held up Govardhana Hill, thinking of the protection of His people.

nau-kréòä ktavän këo / gaìgäyä rasa-kautuké
kurvvanti mathurä goöhe / lokä gamana-nirgame 4
nau-kréòä - boat-sports; ktavän - performed; këaù - Kåñëa; gaìgäyäm - on the

[p.575]
Mänasa Gaìgä; rasa-kautuké - eager for rasa; kurvanti - they did; mathuräm - to
Mathurä; goöhe - from the pasturelands; lokäù - the people; gamana-nirgame coming and going.
"Always eager to taste new varieties of rasa, Kåñëa sported boating pastimes on
Mänasa Gaìgä, ferrying the cowherd folk as they traveled from the pasturelands to
Mathurä for marketing their milk products.

atra däna-nimitta hi / prastaräça viçan hariù
gopikä ramayan reme / bhaktänugraha-kämyayä 5
atra - here; däna-nimittam - on the plea of extracting taxes; hi - certainly;
prastara - a large rock; açam - part; viçan - entering; hariù - the thief of the
mind; gopikäù - milkmaids; ramayan - gave pleasure; reme - enjoyed; bhaktaanugraha - mercy to the devotees; kämyayä - because of desiring.
"Desiring to show mercy to His bhaktas, Çré Hari entered this narrow passageway
in the rock for the purpose of demanding payment of a toll. He enjoyed and gave
pleasure to the milkmaids."

paçyan çré-gaura-candraù sa rasana-kutukäd bähya-vtti vihäya
vaçé-çrévatsa-vetraiù kusuma-kisalayair maëòita çyäma-dhäma

däna me dehi rädhe rasavati vimale däna-pätre 'vadad yo
hy eva tä stauti gauraù sa jayati khalu bho rädhikä-präëa-näthaù 6

paçyan - observing; çré-gaura-candraù - Lord like a golden moon; saù - He;
rasana - tastes; kutukät - out of enthusiasm; bähya-vttim - external activities;
vihäya - giving up; vaçé - flute; çrévatsa - mark of Çré Lakmé; vetraiù - with a staff;
kusuma - flowers; kisalayaiù - with newly grown leaves; maëòitam - decorated;
çyäma-dhäma - the abode of dark beauty; dänam - charity; me - to me; dehi give; rädhe - O Rädhä; rasavati - O abode of rasa; vimale - to this spotless; dänapätre - to this recipient of charity; avadat - He said; yaù - who; evam - thus; täm Her; stauti - He praises; gauraù - the golden Lord; saù - He; jayati - glories!
khalu - indeed; bhoù - Oh!; rädhikä-präëa-näthaù - the Lord of Rädhä's life-

[p.576]
breath.
Observed the stone altar of däna-keli, Çré Gaura Candra became eager to taste the
rasa of the toll pastime, abandoning the consciousness of external phenomena. Then
the effulgent dark beauty manifested. marked with Çrévatsa, holding a bamboo flute
and a staff for herding cows, and adorned with flowers and fresh leaves. He
exclaimed, "O Rädhe! O reservoir of rasa! Give Me charity. I am a most suitable
candidate for Your charity." All glories to Çré Gaura Hari, for whom Rädhikä is
dearer than His life-breath, as He prays in this way.

tadaiva sahasä bhakti-rasäviöo 'khileçvaraù
pääëa jala-da ktvä / lilepa çirasi rudan 7
tadä - then; eva - surely; sahasä - suddenly; bhakti-rasa-äviöaù - absorbed in
the mellows of bhakti; akhila-éçvaraù - the Lord of all; pääëam - stone; jala-dam water-giver cloud; ktvä - made; lilepa - anointed; çirasi - on the head; rudan weeping.
Suddenly overwhelmed by bhakti-rasa, the master of all wept. That stone was also
weeping and Gaura anointed his head with those tears.

gireù pürvve kuëòa-yugma / paçya këa-rasa-pradam
asya dakiëa-pärçve ca / räsa-maëòalam uttamam 8
gireù - of the hill; pürve - to the east; kuëòa-yugmam - a pair of sacred ponds,
Rädhä Kuëa and Çyäma Kuëa; paçya - just see; këa-rasa-pradam - bestowing
mellows of Kåñëa; asya - of Govardhana Hill; dakiëa-pärçve - on the southern
side; ca - and; räsa-maëòalam - the circle of the räsa dance; uttamam - beyond
the modes of material mature.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Behold! To the east of the hill are a pair of kuëas which
bestow Kåñëa-rasa. And on the southern side is the circle of the transcendental räsadance.

[p.577]
çré-rädhä-këayo räsa-viläsa-sthänam atra vai
paçya prema-rasaiù pürëair / bhaktair eva vibhävyate 9
çré-rädhä-këayoù - of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa; räsa-viläsa - pastimes of the räsa
dance; sthänam - place; atra - here; vai - actually; paçya - just see; prema-rasaiù by the mellows of love of Kåñëa; pürëaiù - by the full; bhaktai - by the devotees;
eva - truly; vibhävyate - it is revealed.
"See here the actual place of the räsa-dancing pastimes of Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa.
These pastimes are revealed only to devotees whose hearts are wholly absorbed in
prema-rasa."

rädhä-mädhavayor aikyät / tat tad bhäva-vibhävitaù
tat tal lélänukaraëa / gauräìgaù samadarçayat 10
rädhä-mädhavayoù - of Rädhä and Mädhava; aikyät - by the oneness; tat tat each one; bhäva - mood; vibhävitaù - experienced; tat tat - those same moods;
lélä - pastimes; anukaraëam - followed in footsteps; gauräìgaù - the golden
Lord; samadarçayat - displayed.
Because Çré Gauräìga is the combined form of Rädhä-Mädhava, Gaura Hari
displayed whatever moods the Divine Couple experiences in Their relationship, as
He followed Their lélä step by step.

bhäva-prakäçaka këa / präha brähmaëa-sattamaù
parvvatopari sampaçya / rädhikärädhana-sthalam 11
bhäva-prakäçakam - revelation of ecstacies; këam - Kåñëa; präha - he said;
brähmaëa-sattamaù - the exalted brähmaëa; parvata-upari - upon the hill;
sampaçya - please behold; rädhikä-ärädhana-sthalam - place for the worship of
Rädhikä.
The exalted brähmaëa then spoke to Kåñëa Caitanya, who was experiencing the

[p.578]
bhävamaya pastimes in His heart, "Behold a temple on this hill for the worship of
Çré Rädhikä.

anna-küöa-sthala cätra / sureça-garvva-näçakam
indrotpäta harir vékya / govarddhana-dharo 'bhavat 12
anna-küöa - heaps of grains; sthalam - place; ca - and; atra - here; sura-éça Lord of the demigods; garva - pride; näçakam - destroyer; indra-utpätam calamities; hariù - Hari; vékya - seeing; govardhana-dharaù - the lifter of
Govardhana Hill; abhavat - became.
"Here is the place where the residents of Vraja offered heaps of foodstuff to the
brähmaëas and to Govardhana hill. After seeing the calamities wrought by Indra,
Kåñëa destroyed the pride of that chief of the demigods by lifting Govardhana hill.

parvvatopari ta paçya / hari-räyäkhyaka vibhum
tasyopari dakiëe 'pi / gopäla-räya-saìjïakam 13
parvata-upari - on top of the hill, tam - that; paçya - just see; hari-räyaäkhyakam - known as Hari Räya; vibhum - the great; tasya - of that place; upari above; dakiëe - to the south; api - also; gopäla-räya-saìjïakam - known as
Gopäla Räya.
"On top of the hill please see the great Deity known as Hari Räya. On top of the
southern part of the hill is the Deity known as Gopäla Räya.

indra-garvva-niräse ca / brahmaëä coditä saté
surabhé svar-ëadé-toyenäbhieka mudäkarot 14
govindasya ca vedädyaiù / sevitasya mahottame
ktägasko mahendro 'pi / ya stutvä nirbhayo 'bhavat 15
indra-garva - the pride of Indra; niräse - having cast out; ca - and; brahmaëä -

[p.579]
by Brahmä; coditä - ordered; saté - the saintly; surabhé - wish-fulfilling cow; svaùëadé - celestial Gaìgä; toyena - by water; abhiekam - sacred bath; mudä joyously; akarot - performed; govindasya - of Govinda; ca - and; veda-ädyaiù - by
the personified Vedas and so on; sevitasya - of He who was served; mahä-uttame
- in the great festival; kta-agaskaù - who had done wrong; maha-indraù - the
great Indra; api - although; yam - whom; stutvä - having offered prayers;
nirbhayaù - free from fear; abhavat - he became.
"When Kåñëa cast out the false pride from Indra's heart, by Brahmä's order, the
chaste Surabhé cow joyously bathed Govinda with celestial Gaìgä water. Then in a
great festival Çré Govinda was served by all the Vedas, and çästras, and mighty
Indra, after offering the prayers to Govinda, became free from fear of reactions to
his offence.

sarvva-päpa-hara kuëòa / paçya parvvata-dakiëe
asyopari païca-kuëòa / brahma-rudrendra-süryyakam 16
moketi-kuëòa-saìjïa ca / sarvva-päpa-hara çubham
paçyan gaura-hariù këaù / premnoväca dvija prabhuù 17
sarva-päpa-haram - destroying all sin; kuëòam - the holy pond; paçya - just
see; parvata-dakiëe - to the south of the hill; asya - of that spot; upari - beyond;
païca-kuëòam - five kuëòas; brahma-rudra-indra-süryakam - Brahmä, Çiva,
Indra, the Sungod; moka - liberation; iti - thus; kuëòa-saìjïam - pond, known
as; ca - and; sarva-päpa - all sins; haram - taking away; çubham - auspicious;
paçyan - seeing; gaura-hariù - the golden Lord; këaù - all-attractive; premnä with love; uväca - He said; dvijam - to the brähmaëa; prabhuù - the Master.
"Behold to the south of Govardhana hill this sin-destroying kuëa, and beyond it
five other splendid kuëas, which also remove all sin. They are named Brahma,
Rudra, Indra, Sürya and Mokña." Gazing on them, Çré Kåñëa in His form of
Mahäprabhu Gaura Hari spoke lovingly to the brähmaëa:

dhanyo 'ya giri-räja eva jagati çré-këa-rämau mudä

[p.580]
yatra krédata eva santatam aho gopäla-bälaiù saha

eva jalpati prema-pürëa-rasa-daù çré-gaura-candraù svaya
çré-govarddhana eva sägraham api ta püjayan ntyati 18

dhanya - glory; ayam - this; giri-räja - king of hills; eva - truly; jagati - in the
material world; çré-këa-rämau - the two resplendent brothers Räma and Kåñëa;
mudä - with joy; yatra - where; krédata - they two play; eva - surely; santatam forever; aho - Oh!; gopäla-bälaiù - with the cowherd boys; saha - together; evam thus; jalpati - utters; prema-pürëa - filled with love; rasa-daù - who bestows
mellows; çré-gaura-candraù - the golden-moonlike Lord; svayam spontaneously; çré-govardhana - the favorite hill of Kåñëa; eva - indeed; saagraham - with eagerness; api - even; tam - him; püjayan - offering worship;
ntyati - He dances.
"O thoughout this universe, Giriräja Govardhana is the most glorious of bhaktas.
Here Kåñëa and Räma always play in great bliss with the gopäla-bälas!" Exclaiming
this with heart-felt eagerness, Çré Gaura Candra, the bestower of the complete
spectrum of love for Kåñëa, danced while worshipping Govardhana hill.

Thus ends the Eighth Sarga entitled "Darçana of Govardhana Hill and Other
Holy Places," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Ninth Sarga
mahä-räsa-sthalé-darçanam
Gaura Hari Sees the Site of the Mahä-Räsa

atraiva yamunä-nére / dvädaçé-vrata-karçitaù
varuëena hto nandaù / këa-darçana-kämyayä 1

[p.581]
atra eva - in this very place; yamunä-nére - in the water of the Yamunä; dvädaçé
- of the twelth day of the moon; vrata - by the vow; karçitaù - emaciated;
varuëena - by the water-lord; htaù - taken away; nandaù - the king of Vraja; këadarçana - to see Kåñëa; kämyayä - because of desiring.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Once Nanda Mahäräja had become thin by fasting on
Ekädaçé and was following the vow of bathing on the Dvädaçé. At this place in the
waters of Yamunä, he was spirited away by the guards of Varuëa, lord of the waters,
who was desirous of having darçana of Çré Kåñëa.

jïätvä tato 'pi bhagavän / svaya pitaram änayat
brahma-kuëòe majjayitvä / sva-jana brahma-lokataù 2
äninäya punar vndäraëya gopa-kula vibhuù
tat kuëòa parama-ramya / paçya këa sudurlabham 3
jïätvä - being aware; tataù - then; api - that very person; bhagavän - allopulent person; svayam - in person; pitaram - His father; änayat - brought back;
brahma-kuëòe - in Brahma-kuëa; majjayitvä - induced to bathe; sva-janam - His
own people; brahma-lokataù - after showing the spiritual world; äninäya having brought back; punaù - again; vndä-araëyam - to the forest of Våndä; gopakulam - the group of gopas; vibhuù - the all-pervasive; tat - that; kuëòam - holy
pond; parama-ramyam - extremely charming; paçya - just see; këa - O Kåñëa; sudurlabham - very rarely attained.
"Being aware of all that had happened, the all-opulent and original Supreme
Personality of Godhead rescued His father. He then induced all the cowherds of His
village to bathe at this place in Brahma-kuëa. After revealing to them the vision of
the spiritual world, the all-pervasive Lord brought back the group of gopas to
Vndäraëya. He Çré Kåñëa, please see this extremely delightful and rarely attained
kuëa.

açoka-känana ramya / brahma-kuëòasya cottare
çré-rädhayä saha këo / yatra kréòati paçya tat 4

[p.582]
kärttiké-pürëimäyä tu / deva-deveçvaro hariù
cakära räsa gopébhir / yatra çré-çyäma-sundaraù 5
açoka-känanam - the grove of flame trees; ramyam - enchanting; brahmakuëòasya - of Brahma-kuëòa; ca - and; uttare - to the north; çré-rädhayä saha with Çré Rädhä; këaù - Kåñëa; yatra - where; kréòati - He played; paçya - just see;
tat - that; kärttiké - of the constellation of Kåttikä (October-November);
pürëimäyäm - on the full moon; tu - indeed; deva-deva-éçvaraù - the controller of
the God of gods; hariù - the thief of the wicked mind; cakära - performed;
räsam - the räsa dance; gopébhiù - with the milkmaids; yatra - where; çré-çyämasundaraù - the beautiful dark prince.
"To the north of Brahma-kuëa lies an enchanting grove of açoka trees, where Kåñëa
sported with Çré Rädhä. Now look upon the place where on the full moon of the
month of Kärttika, Çyäma-sundara Hari, the master even of Viñëu, danced the räsa
dance with the Vraja-gopés.

tadaiva rasikägraëéù sa khalu gaura-candro harir
mahä-maëi-nibha-dyutiù prakaöam eva vyakté-bhavan

sa räsa-rasa-täëòavair vividha-ramya-veçojjvalaiù
ratnokita-su-lakitair jayati bhakta-vargaiù prabhuù 6

tadä - then; eva - surely; rasika-agraëéù - the chief of rasikas; saù - He; khalu indeed; gaura-candraù - the Golden Moon; hari - the thief of inauspiciousness;
mahä-maëi - great jewel; nibha - like; dyutiù - luminescent; prakaöam - manifest;
eva - truly; vyakté-bhavan - became manifest; saù - He; räsa-rasa - the mellows of
the räsa dance; täëòavaiù - with fervent dancing; vividha - variegated; ramya charming; veça - garments; ujjvalaiù - with brilliant; ratna - gems; ukita spangled; su-lakitaiù - with exquisite; jayati - all glories; bhakta-vargaiù - with
the assembly of devoted gopés; prabhuù - the Master.
Then Çré Gaura Candra Hari, the chief among rasikas, appeared with the luster of
indra-néla-maëi, accompanied by the throng of His bhaktas, who were absorbed in
the rasa of exuberant räsa-dancing, dressed in exquisite and dazzling variegated

[p.583]
garments that sparkled with precious jewels. All glories to Mahäprabhu!

praphulla-madhura-dyutiù sa-rasa-ramya-vndävana
vasanta-vana-märutaiù prakaöayan sa räsotsavaiù

su-ramyam api ki bruve sakalam eva räsa-sthala
sa gopé-jana-vallabho madana-garvva-kharvvé babhau 7

praphulla - blooming; madhura - sweet; dyutiù - light; sa-rasa - with mellows;
ramya - charming; vndä-vanam - the glades of Våndä; vasanta-vana - spring
forest; märutaiù - by the breezes; ärutai - with the utterances; prakaöayan - made
manifest; sa - He; räsa-utsavaiù - by the räsa festivities; su-ramyam - very
delightful; api kim - what indeed; bruve - I can say; sakalam - all; eva - indeed;
räsa-sthalam - the räsa circle; sa - He; gopé-jana-vallabha - the lover of the milkmaids; madana-garva - the pride of Kämadeva (Cupid); kharvé - laid low; babhau
- He shone.
The enchanting sylvan glades of rasa-permeated Våndävana became filled with the
charming soft luminescence of blooming flowers and spring breezes, and echoed
with the exultant voices of the räsa-dancers and their festival. What shall I say of
such an utterly sublime place as this räsa circle? Here the lover of the gopés shone,
casting low the pride of Kämadeva.

dövä vipras tathä-bhüta / tathäpéçvara-mäyayä
vta sa darayäm äsa / pürvva-lélä-sthalé çubhäm 8
dövä - having seen; vipra - the enlightened brähmaëa; tathä-bhütam - as it was;
tathä api - however; éçvara-mäyayä - by the illusory energy of the Lord; vtam covered; sa - he; darayäm äsa - showed; pürva-lélä - previous pastimes; sthalém places; çubhäm - resplendent.
Although the enlightened brähmaëa saw this vision, he again became covered by
the Lord's mäyä and continued showing Gauräìga the resplendent places of Çré
Kåñëa's previous pastimes.

[p.584]
atas ta paçya govindo / vaçé-vaöa-samépataù
sthito jagau käma-béja / gopé-jana-vimohanam 9
ataù - now; paçya - just see; govindaù - the pleasure of the senses; vaçé - flute;
vaöa - the banyan; samépataù - near; sthitaù - standing; jagau - He sang; kämabéjam - the seed-mantra of desire; gopé-jana - milk-maids; vimohanam bewildering.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Now behold! Standing here by Vaçé-vaöa, Govinda sang the
käma-béja and illusioned the gopés.

çrutvä su-lalita gäna / gopyas tatra samäyayuù
täbhyaù prema-madäd bähya / këo dharmmam açikayat 10
çrutvä - hearing; su-lalitam - very charming; gänam - song; gopyaù - the gopés;
tatra - there; samäyayuù - all came; täbhyaù - to them; prema-madät - mad with
love; bähyam - externals; këaù - Kåñëa; dharmam - religious principles; açikayat taught.
"Hearing that captivating lilting song, the gopés came. But being intoxicated with
love, Çré Kåñëa merely instructed them in the principles of dharma, which are meant
for those concerned with externals.ù

täsä viçuddha-sattva ca / bhäva-dätä ca prema-daù
cakära räsam apy atra / këo yogeçvareçvaraù 11
täsäm - of them; viçuddha-sattvam - purified goodness; ca - and; bhäva-dätä the giver of ecstasy; ca - and; prema-daù - giver of love; cakära - performed;
räsam - the räsa dance; api - very; atra - here; këaù - Kåñëa; yoga-éçvara-éçvaraù the master of those who have mastered yoga.
"Seeing that their hearts were utterly pure, Kåñëa, the master of all those who
master the process of union with Him, awarded them bhäva and prema as He

[p.585]
performed the räsa dance in this very spot.

atra ta paçya gauräìga / govinda-rasa-kautuké
vndävanädhipatya ca / cakära rasa-vallabhaù 12
atra - here; tam - that place; paçya - just see; gauräìga - O Gauräìga; govindarasa-kautuké - eager to taste the mellows of Govinda; vndävana-adhipatyam overlordship of Våndävana; ca - and; cakära - took; rasa-vallabhaù - the lover of
rasa.
"O Golden Lord! Since You are eager to taste Govinda-rasa, see here that place
where rasa-vallabha Çré Kåñëa was crowned sovereign over Våndävana-dhäma.ù

eva räsa-rasämodé / gopéëä räga-vddhaye
ekäm ädäya sahasä / tirobhüto 'tra paçya tat 13
evam - thus; räsa-rasa - the rasa of the räsa dance; ämodé - one who takes
pleasure; gopéëäm - of the gopés; räga-vddhaye - for increasing attachment; ekäm
- one; ädäya - taking away; sahasä - suddenly; tiraù-bhütaù - disappeared; atra here; paçya - just see; tat - that.
"While enjoying conjugal mellow while räsa dancing, in order to increase the
gopés' attachment for Him, Kåñëa suddenly disappeared, taking one of them with
Him. Behold that place!

tasyäù su-carita kena / varëyate çrüyate 'thavä
yasyäù prema-parädhénas / tä hi svädhéna-bhartkäm 14
tasyäù - her; su-caritam - exalted character; kena - how?; varëyate - can be
described; çrüyate - can be heard; athavä - or; yasyäù - of whom; premaparädhénaù - subordinate to love; täm - Her; hi - certainly; svädhéna-bhartkäm - a
heroine who dominates Her lover.

[p.586]
"Her character is so exalted that the Lord Himself accepts subordination to Her
love. Who is that person qualified to describe or hear of Her sublime character?

tatyäja kautuké këas / tv ito 'syäù sannidhi hasan
sä 'pi këa na paçyanté / vihvalä tat-sakhé-janäù 15
militäù këa-janmädi-lélä-tan-mayatä yayuù
gopyaù prema-parädhénäs / tat tad rüpa-prakäçikäm 16
tatyäja - abandoned; kautuké - prankster; këaù - Kåñëa; tu - but; itaù - thence;
asyäù - of her; sannidhim - in the presence; hasan - laughing; sä api - that very
lady; këam - Kåñëa; na - not; paçyanté - seeing; vihvalä - overwhelmed by
distress; tat - her; sakhé-janäù - girlfriends; militäù - they met; këa-janma-ädi-lélä
- Kåñëa's birth and other pastimes; tat-mayatäm - absorbed in that nature; yayuù
- they became; gopyaù - the gopés; prema-para-adhénä - subordinate to His love;
tat tat - in each thought; rüpa - form; prakäçikäm - of those who revealed.
But then, just as She began to think Herself superior to Him, tricky Kåñëa
abandoned Her and waited secretly in a nearby place, laughing to Himself. When
that damsel was thus unable to see Him, She became dazed with distress. Then
meeting with Her sakhés, all of them together became absorbed in Kåñëa
consciousness, as one by one they imitated His pastimes, beginning with His birth
in Mathurä. In this way the gopés became subordinate to Kåñëa's love, and thus He
manifested His person within each and every pastime that they emulated.

täbhyaù sva-viraha-vyädhi-péòitäbhyo nijä tanum
prahasan darçayäm äsa / këo näräyaëa svayam 17
täbhyaù - to them; sva-viraha - separation from Himself; vyädhi - disease;
péòitäbhyaù - to those who were afflicted; nijäm - own; tanum - form; prahasan loudly laughing; darçayäm äsa - showed; këaù - Kåñëa; näräyaëaù - Näräyaëa;
svayam - Himself.
"Then seeing how the gopés were so critically afflicted with the disease of

[p.587]
separation from Him, Kåñëa Näräyaëa loudly laughed as He showed Himself to
them.

täbhiù sammänitaù këaù / parihäse paräjitaù
räsa cakära dharma-jïo / maëdalé parikalpayan 18
täbhiù - by them; sammänitaù - honored; këaù - Kåñëa; parihäse - in His jest;
paräjitaù - defeated; räsam - räsa-dance; cakära - performed; dharma-jïaù - the
knower of religious principles; maëdalém - circle; parikalpayan - making.
"Kåñëa was nicely honored by the gopés. But still He again teased them, declaring
that He had become defeated by their great love for Him. The Lord, who is the
supreme knower of the highest religious principle, then performed the räsa dance by
forming a circle amongst the gopés.

viläsa-rasa-mädhuré rasa-madena mattaù kila
sanéya su-balo janän yama-bhagini-téra hariù

prakäçya bahu-rüpatä jagad-anaìga-sammarddano
raräja vraja-sundaré-nija-bhujais tu baddhaù svayam 19

viläsa-rasa - pastime mellows; mädhuré - loveliness; rasa-madena - by the
intoxication of mellows; mattaù - delighted; kila - verily; sanéya - bringing; subala - the possessor of auspicious strength; janän - the gopés; yama-bhagini - of
the sister of Yamaräja (Yamunä); téram - the bank; hariù - the thief of the mind;
prakäçya - displaying; bahu-rüpatäm - multi-formedness; jagat-anaìga - the
Cupid of the material world; sammardanaù - utterly crushing; raräja - He shone;
vraja-sundaré - of the beautiful girls of Vraja; nija - constantly; bhujaiù - by the
arms; tu - actually; baddhaù - bound up; svayam - voluntarily.
"Truly delighted by the intoxicating mellows of these rasa-permeated pastimes, Çré
Hari, the possessor of auspicious strength, led the gopés to the bank of Yamunä and
exhibited His ability to expand in multiple forms, thereby utterly crushing Cupid's
pride. Then He brilliantly shone by agreeing to be perpetually bound up within the
arms of those beautiful girls of Vraja."

[p.588]
çrutvä räsa-viläsa-vaibhava-rasa çré-gaura-candro hariù
premonmäda-vibhinna-dhairyya-nivaho mädhuryya-särojjvalaù

rädhä-këa vraja-vadhü-gaëair veöita savibhävya
präkaöya tat svätmani tayor darçayan sambabhau sma 20

çrutvä - having heard; räsa-viläsa - the pastimes of the räsa dance; vaibhava magnificence; rasam - mellows; çré-gaura-candraù - beautiful Golden Moon; hari
- the thief of the mind; prema-unmäda - inebriation by love; vibhinna - broken;
dhairya - patience; nivahaù - causing; mädhurya-sära - the essence of the
conjugal rasa; ujjvalaù - ablaze; rädhä-këam - Rädhä-Kåñëa; vraja-vadhü - the
damsels of Vraja; gaëaiù - by the group; veöitam - surrounded; savibhävya contemplating deeply; präkaöyam - manifestation; tat - that; sva-ätmani - in His
own self; tayoù - of those two; darçayan - displaying; sambabhau - He shone like
anything; sma - surely.
After hearing of the glorious mellows of the räsa-lélä, the Golden Moon of Çré Hari
utterly lost all composure due to the inebriating effects of love for Kåñëa. He became
ablaze with the essence of the conjugal rasa, and He contemplated very deeply Çré
Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa surrounded by the damsels of Vraja. Thinking about this again and
again, He caused a visible manifestation within Himself of the Divine Couple and
thus displayed it brilliantly to all.

Thus ends the Ninth Sarga entitled "Gaura Hari Sees the Site of the MahäRäsa," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Tenth Sarga
çré-nikuïja-yamunä-ädi-darçanam
Seeing the Groves on the Yamunä Bank, and Other Térthas

[p.589]
tataç ca paçyätra vasanta-veçau / çré-räma-këau vraja-sundarébhiù
cikréòituù sva-sva-yütheçvarébhiù / sama rasa-jïau kala-dhautamaëòitau 1
tataù - then; ca - and; paçya - just see; atra - here; vasanta-veçau - in spring
dress; çré-räma-këau - Räma and Kåñëa; vraja-sundarébhiù - with the beautiful
girls of Vraja; cikréòituù - they sported; sva-sva-yütha-éçvarébhiù - with the
respective leaders of their groups; samam - in company with; rasa-jïau conversant with rasa; kala-dhauta - gold and silver, softly ringing; maëòitau decorated.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Oh! Here You may see the spot where Räma and Kåñëa, the
Masters of rasa, were apparelled in spring vestments and adorned with softly
ringing gold and silver ornaments. They sported playfully with the fair maidens of
Vraja Dhäma, who are the leaders of the various groups of gopés.

ntyantau gopébhiù särddha / gäyantau rabhasänvitau
gäyantébhiç ca rämäbhir / ntyantébhiç ca çobhitau 2
ntyantau - dancing; gopébhiù - with the gopés; särdham - in the company;
gäyantau - singing; rabhasa-anvitau - filled with enthusiasm; gäyantébhiù - with
the singing gopés; ca - and; rämäbhiù - with the lovely ladies; ntyantébhiù - with
the dancing gopés; ca - and; çobhitau - beautified.
"The heroic dancing and singing of Räma and Kåñëa was embellished by the
dancing and singing of their charming sweethearts, the gopés.

tayor ittha viharatoù / çaìkha-cüòaç ca durmatiù
kadarthayan gopé-janän / täbhyä samupalakitaù 3
tayoù - of those two; ittham - thus; viharatoù - enjoying; çaìkha-cüòaù - the
demon with a conch on his head; ca - and; durmatiù - evil-minded; kadarthayan -

[p.590]
ogling; gopé-janän - the gopés; täbhyäm - with them; samupalakitaù - observed.
"As the two brothers were enjoying thus, an evil demon named Çaìkha-cüä, who
was notable by the conch-shaped jewel upon his head, began ogling the gopés. He
was closely observed by Räma and Kåñëa.

hta asya çiro-ratna / këenäpi hataù khalaù
datta çré-baladeväya / maëi-ratna syamantakam 4
htam - taken; çira-ratnam - the jewel on his head; këena - by Kåñëa; api - also;
hataù - killed; khalaù - wicked; dattam - given; çré-bala-deväya - to Çré Baladeva;
maëi-ratnam - jewel; syamantakam - Syamantaka jewel.
"After slaying that rogue, Kåñëa took that jewel named Syamantaka from the dead
demon's turban and placed it in the hand of Baladeva.

paçyanténä ca gopénä / çré-këena sa-kautukam
tenäpi tan nija-preöhair / datta tat-preyasé prati 5
paçyanténäm - watching; ca - and; gopénäm - the milkmaids; çré-këena - by Çré
Kåñëa; sa-kautukam - eagerly; tena - by Him; api - although; tat - that; nija - own;
prethaiù - byHis most dear gopés; dattam - given; tat-preyasém - to She most dear
to Him; prati - unto.
"While the gopés looked on, Çré Kåñëa playfully gave that jewel to Baladeva.
Baladeva in turn gave it to His own dear gopés, and they ultimately gave it to Kåñëa's
most beloved Çré Rädhä.

gobhiù sama prati-vana pratigacchatoù çré- / vaktra mukundabalayor vraja-sundarébhiù
akaëvatä phalam idam iti gétam atra / çëvan prabhuù pulakitaù kila
roravéti 6

[p.591]
gobhiù samam - with the cows; prati-vanam - to each forest; pratigacchatoù going fowards; çré-vaktram - beautiful faces; mukunda-balayoù - of Mukunda
and Balaräma; vraja-sundarébhiù - with the beautiful maidens of Vraja;
akaëvatäm - of those who have eyes; phalam - fruit; idam - this; iti - thus; gétam song; atra - here; çëvan - hearing; prabhuù - the Master; pulakitaù - having His
hairs thrilled; kila - truly; roravéti - He roared very loudly.
"The real benefit of having eyes is to see the beautiful faces of Mukunda and Bala
as they go forth to graze their cows in all the forests of Vraja." When Prabhu heard
this song, that was chanted by the beautiful maidens of Vraja, His hairs thrilled with
rapture and He roared very loudly.

kumudäkhya-vana paçya / çrédäma-subalädibhiù
saha saìkréòataù këa-rämau yatra sunirbharam 7
kumuda-äkhya-vanam - the forest named Kumuda; paçya - just see; çrédämasubala-ädibhiù - with Çrédäma, Subala and the others; saha - with; saìkréòitaù played; këa-rämau - Kåñëa and Räma; yatra - where; su-nirbharam - very
enthusiastic.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Just see the forest named Kumuda, where Kåñëa and Räma
together with Çrédäma, Subala and the other cowherd boys played with great
exhilaration.

atra sarasvaté-tére / ambikäkhya vana janaiù
püjyate çaìkaro devo / gauré ca vraja-väsibhiù 8
atra - here; sarasvaté-tére - on the bank of the Sarasvaté; ambikä-äkhyam named Ambikä; vanam - forest; janaiù - by the people; püjyate - he is
worshipped; çam-karaù - Lord Çiva (i.e. çam - well-being, kara - one who
causes); devaù - Lord; gauré - fair woman, the wife of Çiva; ca - and; vrajaväsibhiù - by the residents of Vraja.
"Here on the bank of the Sarasvaté is the forest called Ambikä-vana, where Çaìkara-

[p.592]
deva and his wife Gauré are worshipped by the Vraja-väsés.

muneù çapät sarpa-deha / präpto näma sudarçanaù
nandärddha gilite këenoddhtaù päda-saspçan 9
gandharvva iti vikhyätas / tasthau santoayan harim
yayäv atra nija dhäma / këa-saìkérttanair mudä 10
muneù - of the sage; çapät - on account of the curse; sarpa-deham - the body of
a snake; präptaù - attained; näma - named; su-darçanaù - pleasing to see; nanda Nanda Mahäräja; arddham - half; gilite - swallowed; këena - by Kåñëa; uddhtaù drew out; päda-saspçan - touching with His foot; gandharvaù - the Gandharva;
iti - thus; vikhyätaù - renowned; tasthau - stood; santoayan - satisfying; harim the remover of sin; atra - here; nijam - own; dhäma - abode; këa-saìkértanaiù making Kåñëa saìkértana; mudä - joyously.
"By the curse of a sage, the Gandharva of the name Sudarçana received the body of
a serpent. One day, half of Nanda Mahäräja's body was swallowed up by him, but
merely by the touch of His foot, Kåñëa delivered him. The Gandharva then stood in
this place and satisfied Çré Hari by his prayers. Then he departed for his own abode,
joyously singing the names of Kåñëa.

vabhänu-pura paçya / yatra vndävaneçvaré
prädurbhütä mahä-lakmé / rädhä këa-viläsiné 11
vabhänu-puram - the town of Vabhänu; paçya - just see; yatra - where;
vndävana-éçvaré - the queen of Våndävana; prädurbhütä - appeared; mahä-lakmé the supreme goddess Lakñmé; rädhä - highest attainment; këa-viläsiné - who
enjoys pastimes with Kåñëa.
"Behold the city of King Våñabhänu. Here Çrématé Rädhäräëé, the Queen of
Våndävana, made Her appearance. She is the supreme goddess of fortune who
enjoys pleasure-pastimes with Kåñëa.

[p.593]
giri raivataka paçya / baladevo rasägraëéù
yatra gopé-janaiù kréòan / dvivida paricürëayat 12
girim - hill; raivatakam - Raivataka; paçya - just see; baladevaù - Baladeva; rasaagraëéù - foremost in tasting rasa; yatra - where; gopé-janaiù - with the gopés;
kréòan - sporting; dvividam - Dvivida gorilla; paricürëayat - pulverized.
"See the Raivataka mountain where Baladeva, the foremost among those expert in
tasting rasa, sported with the gopés. And this is where He pulverized the gorilla
demon named Dvivida.

yayau yämunaka téra / kalindé tä vikarayaë
yatheccha jalam äviçya / kréòan gopébhir acyutaù 13
yayau - He went; yämunakam téram - the bank of Yamunä; kalindém - the
daughter of the Kalinda mountain; täm - that; vikarayaë - dragging; yathäiccham - at His will; jalam - water; äviçya - entering; kréòan - He played; gopébhiù
- with the gopés; acyutaù - the infallible.
Once Balaräma went to the bank of the Yamunä, and with His celebrated plow He
dragged Kalindé to Him. The infallible Lord entered her waters and amused Himself
with the gopés as He liked.

téram äsädya väsobhir / vibhüya bhüaëair varaiù
gopébhis tä bhüayitvä / kréòati këa-kautuké 14
téram - bank; äsädya - getting upon; väsobhiù - with garments; vibhüya having made brilliant; bhüaëaiù - with ornaments; varaiù - excellent; gopébhiù by the gopés; täù - they; bhüayitvä - having been ornamented; kréòati - He
sported; këa-kautuké - eager to please Kåñëa.
"After Balaräma had remounted Yamunä's bank, the gopés dressed Him brilliantly
and adorned Him with excellent ornaments. Then He who is ever eager to satisfy

[p.594]
His brother Kåñëa enjoyed sporting amongst them.

nanda-grämottare paçya / pävanäkhya sarovaram
yatra nandasya go-vatsäç / caranti këa-pälitäù 15
nanda-gräma - the town of Nanda; uttare - to the north; paçya - just see;
pävana-äkhyam - called Pävana (purifying); saraù-varam - beautiful lake; yatra where; nandasya - of Nanda; go-vatsäù - the cows and calves; caranti - wander;
këa-pälitäù - protected by Kåñëa.
"Behold the beautiful lake named Pävana which lies to the north of the town of
Nanda. There Nanda's cows and calves graze as they are tended by Kåñëa.

nandéçvara-paçcime ca / vana hi kämya-pürvvakam
picchaläkhyaù parvvato 'yam / atra tiöhati nirmmalaù 16
nandéçvara; paçcime - to the west; ca - and; vanam - forest; hi - surely; kämyapürvakam - known as Kämyavana; picchala-äkhyaù - called Picchala; parvataù the mountain; ayam - this; atra - here; tiöhati - stands; nirmalaù - without a fault.
"To the west of Nandéçvara is the forest of Kämyavana, where the immaculate
mountain named Picchala stands.

picchale khelataù këa-rämau ca bälakaiù saha
ariöa-keçi-vyomädyä / väçva-mea-rüpiëaù 17
picchale - on Picchala; khelataù - they play; këa-rämau - Kåñëa and Räma; ca and; bälakaiù saha - with the boys; ariöa-keçi-vyoma-ädyä - Ariöa, Keçi, Vyoma
and other demons; va-açva-mea - bull, horse, and ram; rüpiëaù - took the forms.
"On Picchala mountain, Räma and Kåñëa sported with the cowherd boys. There
Ariöa, Keçi, Vyoma and other demons took the forms of a bull, a horse and a ram
respectively.

[p.595]
païcatvam äpitäù këät / sarvva-mokädhikäriëaù
këo 'pi bälakaiù särddha / yatra kréòati sarvvadä 18
païcatvam - death; äpitäù - attained; këät - on account of Kåñëa; sarva-moka all liberations; adhikäriëaù - having the right for; këaù - Kåñëa; api - even;
bälakaiù - the boys; särdham - with; yatra - where; kréòati - He plays; sarvadä at all times.
"By the grace of Kåñëa's strong arms, their bodies merged with the five gross
elements, and they thus acquired the right for all varieties of liberation. Here Kåñëa
forever frolics with the cowherd boys.

khadiräkhya vana ramya / phala-pupa-samanvitam
manda-väyubhir äkérëa / paçya gauräìga-sundara 19
khadira-äkhyam - named Khadira; vanam - forest; ramyam - charming; phalapupa - fruits and flowers; samanvitam - with; manda-väyubhiù - with sweet
breezes; äkérëam - filled; paçya - just see; gauräìga-sundara - O Golden Moon.
"O beautiful Golden Lord! Behold the charming forest named Khadiravana, whose
trees are filled with fruits and flowers, and who is always cooled by pleasant
breezes.

atraiva gopébhiù särddha / rädhä-këau nirantaram
kréòataù kautukäviöau / kraya-vikraya-lélayä 20
atra eva - in this very spot; gopébhiù särdham - in company with milkmaids;
rädhä-këau - Rädhä-Kåñëa; nirantaram - forever; kréòataù - play; kautuka-aviöau absorbed in a jesting mood; kraya-vikraya - buying and selling; lélayä - with the
pastime.
"In this very spot, Rädhä and Kåñëa in the company of the milkmaids forever play

[p.596]
in their pastimes of buying and selling.

nikuïja-nava-mallikä-nava-tamäla-sälärjjunair
açoka-nava-mädhavé-nava-rasäla-saìghaiù kila

mayüra-çuka-kokilai rabhasam eva saçobhite
su-pupa-parisasthitau jayata eva rädhä-mädhavau 21

nikuïja - bowers; nava-mallikä - fresh jasmine; nava-tamäla - fresh tamäla tree;
säla-arjjunaiù - with säla and arjjuna trees; açoka - flame trees; nava-mädhavé freshly blooming jasmine; nava-rasäla - ripened mango trees; saìghaiù - with
groups; kila - indeed; mayüra-çuka-kokilaiù - with peacocks, parrots and
cuckoos; rabhasam - delight; eva - indeed; saçobhite - fully beautified; su-pupa sublime flowers; parisasthitau - situated in the midst; jayataù - glories!; eva surely; rädhä-mädhavau - to Rädhä-Mädhava.
"Amidst the bower groves of freshly blooming jasmine-twined tamäla, säla and
arjuna trees, which mingle with ripened mango, açoka and mädhavé trees,
enchanced by the gorgeous plumage of peacocks, parrots and cuckoos, in the midst
of the most colorful and fragrant of flowers, reside the youthful couple, Çré Çré
Rädhä-Mädhava. All glories to Them!

su-ramya-sakhé-cäturé-carita-cäru-vaçé-svanaiù
pragalbha-taruëé-janair hasita-géta-ntyotsavaiù

sahaiva satata smara-madana-yukta-lélä-parau
räseçvaré-räseçvarau rasa-viçea-pälotsukau 22

su-ramya - very fascinating; sakhé - female confidantes; cäturé - crafty; carita character; cäru - beautiful; vaçé-svanaiù - with the sounds of the flute; pragalbha proud; taruëé-janaiù - with the young girls; hasita - laughing; géta - singing; ntya
- dancing; utsavaiù - by festivals; saha - with; eva - surely; satatam - always;
smara - Cupid; madana - enmaddening; yukta - filled with; lélä-parau - the two
who are absorbed in pastimes; räsa-éçvaré - the Goddess of the räsa-dance; räsaéçvarau - the God of the räsa-dance; viçea - specific; päla - protecting; utsukau the two who are eager.

[p.597]
"The God and Goddess of the räsa dance, who are perpetually immersed in
amorous pastimes which bewilder even the mind of Kämadeva, nourish with great
eagerness the unique rasa which distinguishes Their respectve natures. They are
engaged in a continuous festival of joking, singing, dancing, and playing upon flutes
in the company of Their sakhés, who are very lovely, crafty, courageous and ever
glorious."

rädhä-këa-viläsa-vaibhava-rasa çrutvä rudann apy asau
tat tad rüpa-prakaöana-paro mädhuré-dhuryya-säram

vyakté-ktya sa jagati punar goöha-bhävena pürëaù
sändränando vijayati para çré-çacé-nandano 'yam 23

rädhä-këa - Rädhä-Kåñëa; viläsa - pastimes; vaibhava - splendor; rasam mellows; çrutvä - hearing; rudan - weeping; api - very much; asau - He; tat tat each and every; rüpa - form; prakaöana - manifesting; paraù - absorbed; mädhuré sweetness; dhurya - excellence; säram - essence; vyakté-ktya - manifesting; saù He; jagati - in the universe; punaù - again; goöha - of Vraja; bhävena - the ecstasy;
pürëaù - filled; sändra - concentrated; änandaù - bliss; vijayati - all glories!;
param - supreme; çré-çacé-nandanaù - the son of Çacé; ayam - this.
Upon hearing of these splendrous rasa-laden pastimes between Rädhäräëé and
Kåñëa-candra, which are imbued with the quintessential superexcellence of
sweetness, Mahäprabhu wept and became fully absorbed in manifesting the
beautiful forms of the Divine Couple. Furthermore, He, the embodiment of intensely
condensed bliss, became filled with the moods of Vraja, and again made those
pastimes manifest within this material world. May Çré Çacé-nandana be supremely
glorified!

Thus ends the Tenth Sarga entitled "Seeing the Groves on the Yamunä Bank,
and Other Holy Places," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *

[p.598]
Eleventh Sarga
akrüra-gamana-ädi-lélä-çravaëam
Hearing Çré Kåñëa's Pastimes Beginning with the Arrival of Akrüra

eva sa nitya-léläbhir / divyati vraja-bhümiu
prakaöänumatenäpi / kathyate yat tathä çëu 1
evam - thus; saù - He; nitya-léläbhiù - by eternal pastimes; divyati - He plays;
vraja-bhümiu - in the lands of Vraja; prakaöa - manifest; anumatena - by
accepting; api - also; kathyate - it is narrated; yat - which; tathä - so; çëu - please
hear.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Thus the Lord enjoys His eternal pastimes (nitya-lélä) in
the lands of Vraja. Now I will describe some of His occasional pastimes (prakaöalélä) that are manifest only in the material world. Kindly hear further as they are
narrated.

kasena prahito 'krüro / rathenägatavän pathi
smaran çré-räma-këau ca / tayor ddarçana-lälasaù 2
kasena - by Kasa; prahitaù - sent; a-krüraù - not cruel, Kåñëa's uncle; rathena by chariot; ägatavän - came; pathi - on the road; smaran - remembering; çréräma-këau - Räma and Kåñëa; ca - and; tayoù - of those two; darçana-lälasaù eager for the sight.
"Being sent from Mathurä by Kasa, Akrüra travelled by chariot on the road to Çré
Våndävana. Along the way, he constantly remembered Räma and Kåñëa, feeling most
eager to see Them.

nänä-manorathaiù pürëaù / premäçru-pulakair vtaù

[p.599]
dadarça caraëämbhoja-cihnam atraiva pävanam 3
nänä - many; manaù-rathaiù - the chariots of the mind (thoughts): pürëaù filled; prema-açru - tears of love; pulakaiù - with hairs thrilled by rapture; vtaù covered; dadarça - he saw; caraëa - feet; ambho-ja - water-born (lotus); cihnam signs; atra eva - in this very spot; pävanam - purifying.
"This is the very spot where many thoughts crowded Akrura's mind, where tears of
love fell from his eyes, and the hairs of his body thrilled with ecstasy as he saw
Räma and Kåñëa's blessed footprints and the divine signs of Their lotus feet.

rathäd utthäya çirasi / dhülim ädäya sa-tvaram
daëòavat patito bhümau / dövä çré-räma-keçavau 4
rathät - from the chariot; utthäya - rising; çirasi - on his head; dhülim - dust;
ädäya - taking; sa-tvaram - swiftly; daëòa-vat - like a rod; patitaù - fell; bhümau on the earth; dövä - seeing; çré-räma-keçavau - Çré Räma and Keçava.
"Finally seeing Räma and Keçava, Akrüra rose from the chariot, fell like a rod upon
the earth, and took the dust of Vraja on his head.

äbhyä sammänito nétaù / sva-gha paramädarät
püjitaù sv-anna-pänädyair / nandena su-mahätmanä 5
äbhyäm - by them; sammänitaù - honored; nétaù - led; sva-gham - own home;
parama-ädarät - with great respect; püjitaù - worshipped; su-anna - nice foods;
päna-ädyaiù - drink and so on; nandena - by Nanda; su-mahä-ätmanä - by the
very great soul.
"Akrüra was honored by Them and was led with great respect to Their own home,
where the great soul Nanda Mahäräja also offered him a worshipful welcome as an
honored guest, presenting him with palatable food, drink and other pleasing
articles.

[p.600]
kasa-cikérita çrutvä / räma-këa-samanvitaù
nanda äghoayad goöha / mathurä-gamanäya ca 6
kasa-cikéritam - the desire of Kasa; çrutvä - hearing; räma-këa-samanvitaù together with Räma and Kåñëa; nanda - Nanda; äghoayat - called; goöham assembly of the cowherds; mathurä - Mathurä; gamanäya - for going; ca - and.
"When Mahäräja Nanda along with Räma and Kåñëa heard of King Kasa's wish, he
called an assembly of all the cowherds to prepare for the journey to Mathurä.

eva çrutvä parama-sukha-dau / räma-këau dadarça ca 7
vätsalye sära-bhütä sä / yaçodä räma-këayoù
kara dhtvä kroòé-ktya / babhäe sa-tvara harim 8
evam - thus; çrutvä - hearing; parama-sukha-dau - the two givers of
transcendental bliss; räma-këau - Räma and Kåñëa; dadarça - she saw; ca - and;
vätsalye - in maternal affection; sära-bhütä - excellent; sä - she; yaçodä - Yaçodä
Mätä; räma-këayoù - of Räma and Kåñëa; karam - hand; dhtvä - held; kroòé-ktya took to the breast; babhäe - she said; sa-tvaram - with haste; harim - to Hari.
"When Yaçodä Mätä heard this news, she gazed upon Räma and Kåñëa, who
bestow supreme happiness, with consummate maternal affection. Then taking Their
hands, she embraced Them and spoke with urgency to Çré Hari:

tataù ki mä parityajya / mathurä gantum icchathaù
na dövä mukha-candra vä / katha dhäsyämi jévitam 9
tataù - then; kim - why?; mäm - me; parityajya - abandoning; mathuräm Mathurä; gantum - to go; icchathaù - You two desire; na - not; dövä - seeing;
mukha-candram - lotus faces; väm - Your; katham - how?; dhäsyämi - shall I hold
on to; jévitam - life.

[p.601]
"`Are You two now abandoning me, desiring to go to Mathurä? If I do not see Your
lotus faces, how can I continue to live?'

na hi na héti mätas tvat-sannidhi kroòam ästhitau
tiöhävas tva vijänéyäù / satya satya na saçayaù 10
na hi na hi - it is not! it is not!; iti - thus; mätaù - O mother; tvat-sannidhim - in
your presence; kroòam - bosom; ästhitau - situated; tiöhävaù - we two stay; tvam
vijänéyäù - you should know; satyam satyam - truly, truly; na saçayaù - there is
no doubt.
"They replied, `It is not so! No! Not so! Mätä, you must understand that We two
always stay at your breast. This is the truth! Yes, the truth! Have no doubt of this!'

çrutvä prema-parétätmä / cumbamänä mukha tayoù
sthiré-bhütvä sukha mene / räma-këau hdi sthitau 11
çrutvä - hearing; prema-paréta-ätmä - a soul immersed in love; cumbamänä kissing; mukham - faces; tayoù - of those two; sthiré-bhütvä - becoming stable;
sukham - happiness; mene - considered; räma-këau - Räma and Kåñëa; hdi - on
the heart; sthitau - situated.
"Hearing these words, Yaçodä was overcome by love and kissed the faces of the
two boys. Then she composed herself, thinking happily that Räma and Kåñëa were
always embracing her.

etan madhye parama-vivaçä duùkha-santapta-cittä
çünya matvä sakala-bhuvana däsikäù pcchamänä

ko 'sau dürät çamana-sadça ägato räja-düto
nanda-dväri sakala-vraja-jana-präëa-sambädha-käré 12

etat - this; madhye - in the midst; parama-vivaçä - supremely helpless; duùkhasantapta-cittä - heart intensely burning with grief; çünyam - void; matvä thinking; sakala-bhuvanam - all the worlds; däsikäù - female servants;

[p.602]
pcchamänä - inquiring; kaù - who?; asau - he; dürät - from afar; çamana-sadçaù like Yamaräja; ägataù - come; räja-dütaù - messenger of the king; nanda-dväri at the gate of Nanda; sakala-vraja-jana - all the people of Vraja; präëa - life
force; sambädha-käré - constrictor.
"Then, even while she was thinking in that way, Yaçodä suddenly felt utterly
helpless, and her heart burned intensely with grief. Feeling that all the worlds had
now become devoid of life, she inquired of her female servants, `Who is this
messenger of the king come from afar to the door of Nanda? Appearing like Yamaräja, he is now choking the life-breath of all the people of Vraja!'

çrutvä vraja-striyaù sarvvä / räma-këätmakehayä
nänä-bhävair upetäs tä / divyonmäda-su-lakaëäù 13
çrutvä - hearing; vraja-striyaù - the women of Vraja; sarväù - all; räma-këa Räma and Kåñëa; ätmaka - self; ihayä - with their endeavors; nänä-bhävaiù - by
many moods; upetäù - got; täù - they; divya - divine; unmäda - madness; sulakaëäù - auspicious signs.
"After hearing that Këa was leaving, all the women of Vraja, whose every endeavor
was dedicated to Räma and Kåñëa, exhibited through various ecstatic emotions the
auspicious symptoms of divine madness.

etan madhye sva-sva-pärçve / sarvväs tä vraja-su-bhruvaù
sva-sva-nätha sukhenaiva / paçyantyaù prema-vihvaläù 14
etat - this; madhye - in the midst; sva-sva - respectively; pärçve - on the side;
sarväù - all; täù - them; vraja-su-bhruvaù - the ladies of Vraja, whose eyebrows
were very beautiful; sva-sva - respectively; nätham - Lord; sukhena - charmingly;
eva - certainly; paçyantyaù - seeing; prema-vihvaläù - unsteady out of love.
"All the while, these young ladies of Vraja, whose eyebrows were very eloquent,
glanced charmingly upon their respective Lords, and their hearts became unsteady
out of love.

[p.603]
tad-darçana-mahänandaiù / sampürëäù këa-vallabhäù
kena savarëyate hy äsä / prema-vaibhava-lakaëam 15
tat-darçana - vision of the Lord; mahä-änandaiù - with great joy; sampürëäù completely full; këa-vallabhäù - the lovers of Kåñëa; kena - how?; savarëyate - it
can be described; hi - certainly; äsäm - of them; prema-vaibhava - the power of
love; lakaëam - symptoms.
"Just by seeing Him, Kåñëa's lovers became completely filled with great bliss. How
can their glorious symptoms of prema ever be completely described?

sva-sva-yütheçvaré sarvvä / gopikä prema-rüpiëé
äyäsye çéghram eveti / giräçväsya kara-dvayam 16
dhtväsä sva-karäbhyä tau / cumbanäliìganädibhiù
svädhénatä samprakäçya / räma-këau vijahratuù 17
sva-sva - respective; yütha-éçvaré - leaders of the groups of gopés; sarvä - all;
gopikä - milkmaid; prema-rüpiëé - the form of love; äyäsye - I shall return;
çéghram - quickly; eva - indeed; iti - thus; girä - by words; äçväsya - comforting;
kara-dvayam - two hands; dhtvä - having taken; äsäm - their; sva-karäbhyäm by their own two hands; tau - the two; cumbana - kissing; äliìgana - embracing;
ädibhiù - and so on; sva-adhénatäm - of their own subservient nature;
samprakäçya - showing; räma-këau - Räma and Kåñëa; vijahratuù - enjoyed.
"To all the leaders of the respective groups of gopés, maidens whose personalities
epitomized unalloyed love, Räma and Kåñëa offered words of comfort, saying, `Soon,
I shall return.' Showing submissiveness, They took the gopés' hands in Their hands,
and taking pleasure in their company, They kissed and embraced them.

tataù sarvva-vrajänanda-räma-këa-samanvitaù
mano-gaìgä samuttéryya / yayau vraja-purät purém 18

[p.604]
tataù - then; sarva-vraja-änanda - the bliss of all the residents of Vraja; rämakëa-samanvitaù - together with Räma and Kåñëa; mana-gaìgäm - Mänasa Gaìgä
lake; samuttérya - crossing; yayau - he went; vraja-purät - from the precincts of
Vraja; purém - to Mathurä.
"Then together with Räma and Kåñëa, who were the sole source of happiness for
the residents of Vraja, Akrüra crossed the Mänasa Gaìgä lake and went from Vrajapura toward the city of Mathurä.

akrüraç ca kiyad düra / gatvä räma-janärddanau
snätu yamunäm äviçya / ratha-sthau tau dadarça ha 19
tayor vibhüti sampaçyan / praëamya vismayänvitaù
çrutvä bahu-vidha täbhyä / sahito mathuräm agät 20
akrüraù - Akrüra; ca - and; kiyat düram - some distance; gatvä - having gone;
räma-janärdanau - Räma and Janärdana; snätum - to bathe; yamunäm - Yamunä
river; äviçya - having entered; ratha-sthau - seated on the chariot; tau - the two;
dadarça - he saw; ha - truly; tayoù - of those two; vibhütim - opulence;
sampaçyan - seeing fully; praëamya - bowing down; vismaya-anvitaù - filled with
wonder; çrutvä - heard; bahu-vidham - many kinds; täbhyäm - from them;
sahitaù - together; mathuräm - Mathurä; agät - went.
"After travelling some distance, Akrüra stopped and entered the Yamunä to take
bath, and he saw that Räma and Janärdana were both seated on the chariot. But
within the water he saw Them again in supremely opulent forms, and he bowed
down to Them in great wonder. Then he travelled with Them to Mathurä, all the
while hearing many varieties of topics from Them.

sudurmmukhäkhya-rajaka / nihatya vastra-saìghaçaù
ghétvätaù sudämno hi / ghä tau jagmatuù saha 21

[p.605]
su-du-mukha-äkhya - named "very-evil-face"; rajakam - washerman; nihatya having slain; vastra - cloth; saìghaçaù - heaps; ghétvä - took; ataù - then;
sudämnaù - of Sudämä; hi - certainly; ghäm - home; tau - they two; jagmatuù went; saha - with.
"Having slain the washerman named Sudurmukha, Kåñëa and Balaräma
appropriated heaps of his cloth and took it to the home of Sudämä, the garlandmaker.

tataù sa-gaëayoù so 'pi / tayor veça cakära ha
kubjäpi ca tayor aìga / candanenäbhyabhüayat 22
tataù - then; sa-gaëayoù - with Their company; saù - he; api - also; tayoù - of
those two; veçam - attire; cakära - he made; ha - indeed; kubjä - the hunchback
woman; api - also; tayoù - of them; aìgam - bodies; candanena - with
sandalwood pulp; abhyabhüayat - adorned.
"Then Sudämä prepared attire from the cloth for the two brothers and for Their
company. Thereafter Kubjä, the hunchback woman, decorated Their bodies with the
pulp of sandalwood.

ktvä tä rüpa-sampürëä / dhanur bhaìga ca mädhavaù
sa-rämaù çakaöa gatvä / mätur dattam abhojayat 23
ktvä - having made; täm - her; rüpa-sampürëäm - full of beauty; dhanuù - bow;
bhaìgam - breaking; ca - and; mädhavaù - the husband of Lakñmé; sa-rämaù with Räma; çakaöam - cart; gatvä - went; mätuù - of His mother; dattam - gave;
abhojayat - fed.
"After transforming Kubjä into a woman filled with exquisite beauty, the Lord
broke the sacrificial bow. Then Mädhava went with Räma to the cart of His family
and was fed by His mother.

rajanyä saha rämeëa / nanda-kroòa-gato hariù

[p.606]
lälyamänaù sukha tena / suväpa bhakta-vatsalaù 24
rajanyäm - at night; saha rämeëa - with Räma; nanda-kroòa-gataù - at the chest
of Nanda; hariù - Hari; lälyamänaù - cherished; sukham - happily; tena - with
him; suväpa - He slept; bhakta-vatsalaù - affectionate to His devotees.
"That night, Hari and Räma, who cherish Their devotees, lay at Nanda Räja's
bosom, and cherished by him They slept happily."

etat çrutvä çré-gauräìgas / tat tad bhäva-vibhävitaù
babhüva sa rasäviöaù / këa-däso 'pi vismitaù 25
etat - this; çrutvä - hearing; çré-gauräìgaù - the Golden Lord; tat tat - each;
bhäva - mood; vibhävitaù - experienced; babhüva - He was; saù - He; rasa mellows; äviöaù - absorbed; këa-däsaù - Kåñëa Däsa; api - however; vismitaù puzzled.
Hearing these narrations of the deeds of Kåñëa and Balaräma, Çré Gauräìga
perceived and experienced each of Their pastimes as it occurred, and thus He
became immersed in that particular rasa. Kåñëa Däsa was mystified to behold this.

Thus ends the Eleventh Sarga entitled "Hearing Çré Kåñëa's Pastimes After the
Arrival of Akrüra," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Twelfth Sarga
kasa-vadha-ädi-varëanam
The Narration of the Slaying of Kasa and Other Pastimes

[p.607]
këa-däsas tataù präha / çëu kasasya ceöitam
yat kta tena duöena / tat kiïcit kathyate 'dhunä 1
kåñëa-däsa - the guide of Lord Gaura; tata - then; präha - he said; çåëu - hear;
kasasya - of Kasa; ceöitam - the activities; yat - which; ktam - done; duöena - by
the wicked; tat - that; kiïcit - somewhat; kathyate - is described; adhunä - now.
Kåñëa Däsa continued, "Hear of the activities of Kasa. Now the deeds performed by
that wicked man shall be described somewhat.

mtyu-düta bahu-vidha / dövä rätrau su-durmmanäù
kaso maïcädika sarvva / kärayäm äsa sa-tvaram 2
mtyu-dütam - the messenger of death; bahu-vidham - in many ways; drñövä seeing; rätrau - at night; kasa - Kåñëa's evil uncle; su-durmanäù - miscreant;
maïca - dais; ädikam - and so on; kärayäm äsa - accomplished; sa-tvaram quickly.
"That night, the miscreant Kasa saw the messenger of death appear in many ways.
The next day he hastily prepared the dais and other arrangements for the wrestling
contest.

maïcopari-sthitaù so 'pi / cävähya bandhu-bändhavän
samänäyya tad upari / sasthäpya präha durmmadaù 3
maïca - dais; upari - on top; sa api - that very person; ävähya - invited; bandhubändhavän - friends and relatives; samänäyya - summoned; sasthäpya - bringing
up; präha - he said; durmadaù - foolishly proud.
"He sat upon the dais and summoned his friends and relatives. Then having
assembled them together, Kasa seated them also upon the dais and spoke while
swollen with pride:

[p.608]
änéya nanda ca sa-gopa-vnda / niveçya maïcopari sambhrameëa
kutra sthitau tau vara-yuddha-kautuké / paçyämi yuddha ca tayoù
su-nirbharam 4
änéya - bringing; ca - and; sa-gopa-vndam - together with the host of cowherds;
niveçya - seating; maïca-upari - on the dais; sambhrameëa - with great respect;
kutra - where?; sthitau - situated; tau - they two; vara-yuddha - for a good fight;
kautuké - very eager; paçyämi - I see; yuddham - the fight; tayoù - of those two; sunirbharam - very violent.
"`Bring Nanda and the host of cowherds, and respectfully offer them seats on the
dais. And where are those two boys? I relish a good fight, and now I shall take
pleasure in witnessing Their very fierce combat.'

tataù para räma-janärddanau prabhü / dvära-sthita kuïjara-räjam
eva
hatvä ca ta tau ca ghéta-dantau / prajagmatur eva su-raìga-bhümim
5
tataù param - thereafter; prabhü - the two Lords; dvära-sthitam - situated at the
door; kuïjara-räjam - the king of elephants; hatvä - having slain; tau - the two;
ghéta-dantau - grasping the tusks; prajagmatuù - they advanced; su-raìgabhümim - to the splendid exhibition arena.
"Thereafter the two Lords, Räma and Janärdana, slew the king of elephants named
Kuvalayäpéòa, who had been strategically placed at the gate, and bearing its tusks
They advanced towards the magnificent wrestling arena.

cäëüra-muöé sa-gaëau nihatya / kasa ca sarvvair abhinanditau
sukham
tataù pitbhyäm upalälitau tau / nanda samäsädya mudähatus tam 6
cäëüra-muöé - Cäëüra and Muöika; sa-gaëau - with their cohorts; nihatya -

[p.609]
having killed; sarvaiù - by everyone; abhinanditau - applauded; sukham happily; tataù - then; pitbhyäm - by their parents; upalälitau - fondled; tau - they;
samäsädya - approaching; mudä - with joy; ähatuù - they said; tam - him
"Kåñëa and Balaräma killed Cäëüra and Muñöika along with the other wrestlers,
and finally Kasa was also slain. They were jubilantly applauded by everyone. Next,
after being caressed by their parents Vasudeva and Devaké, They approached Nanda
Mahäräja and joyously addressed him.

pitaù kiyanta mathurä didke / käla bhavän me yadi su-prasannaù
tadä hi sarvva sukham eva me pitar / mad-agrajo yätu tvayä sama
sukhé 7
pitaù - O father; kiyantam - for so much; mathuräm - Mathurä; didke - I desire
to see; kälam - time; bhavän - your honor; me - with me; yadi - if; su-prasannaù very pleased; tadä - then; sarvam - all; sukham - happily; eva - indeed; me - my;
mat-agrajaù - my elder brother; yätu - He should go; tvayä - with you; samam in company; sukhé - happy.
"Kåñëa said, `O father, I desire to see Mathurä for some time. If this satisfies you,
that is My satisfaction. Please let my elder brother happily accompany you back to
Vraja.'

çrutvä nando hasan präha / bälo 'si tva niraìkuçaù
matta-siha-samaù kena / çäsitu çakyate bhavän 8
çrutvä - hearing; hasan - smiling; präha - he said; bälaù - boy; asi tvam - You
are; niraìkuçaù - uncontrolled; matta-siha - maddened lion; samaù - like; kena how?; çäsitum - to restrain; çakyate - it is possible; bhavän - Your honor.
"Upon hearing this, Nanda smiled and said, `You are an uncontrollable boy, just
like a maddened lion. How is it possible to check Your Grace?

balaräma punaç cätra / bhavän hi sthätum arhati

[p.610]
yathä gavä cäraëärtha / vndävana-gataù kvacit 9
balaräma - O reservoir of power and pleasure; punaù - also; ca - and; atra here; bhavän - your honor; hi - indeed; sthätum - to stay; arhati - ought; yathä as; gaväm - of the cows; cäraëa - herding; artham - purpose; vndävana-gataù - go
to Våndävana; kvacit - occasionally.
"`Balaräma, You should also stay here. From time to time You may come to
Våndävana to tend the cows.'

samäliìgya sukhenaiva / täbhyä vandita ädarät
yayau nandéçvara nandaù / këa-rämau hdi sthitau 10
samäliìgya - after embracing; sukhena - gladly; eva - surely; täbhyäm - with
them; vanditaù - saluted respectfully; ädarät - with respect; yayau - He left;
nandéçvaram - the place of Kåñëa's childhood pastimes; räma-kåñëa - the two
divine Brothers; hdi - in the heart; sthitau - abiding.
"After glady embracing Them and being offered respects by Them, Nanda left for
Nandéçvara, with Kåñëa and Räma residing in His heart.

tataù para vasudeva-devaké putrayoù kila
upavéta ca gäyatré / däpayäm äsatur mudä 11
tataù param - afterwards; vasudeva-devaké; putrayoù - of the two sons; kila indeed; upavétam - sacred thread; gäyatrém - Gäyatré mantra; däpayäm äsatuù they administered; mudä - happily.
"Thereafter, Vasudeva and Devaké had their two sons receive the sacred thread and
intiated into chanting the Gäyatré mantra.

çré-këa-carita kena varëyate kudra-buddhinä
yatra brahmädayaù sarvve / muhyanti pära-darçinaù 12

[p.611]
çré-këa-caritam - Çré Kåñëa's character; kena - how; varëyate - it is described;
kudra-buddhinä - by a man of meager intellect; yatra - where; brahmä-ädayaù Brahmä and others; sarve - all; muhyanti - are baffled; pära-darçinaù - who can
see across.
"How can a man of meager intelligence describe the character of Çré Kåñëa, when
Brahmä and others who are able to see beyond material existence are baffled in
doing so?"

eva hi sütra-rüpä ca / lélä mathura-sambhaväm
mene bhüritarä këa-caitanyo rasa-vigrahaù 13
evam - thus; hi - indeed; sütra-rüpäm - in condensed form; ca - and; léläm pastimes; mathura-sambhaväm - taking place in Mathurä; mene - He respected;
bhüritaräm - much; këa-caitanyaù - Kåñëa in His munificent feature; rasavigrahaù - form of rasa.
[Muräri Gupta continued narrating to Dämodara Paëita:] Thus Kåñëa Caitanya, the
personification of all transcendental mellows heard with great respect the numerous
Mathurä pastimes of Çré Kåñëa, in the form of brief sütras.

kvacit çyäma kvacit péta / lélänukaraëa kvacit
jagan-mohana-rüpa ca / sva-rüpa prema-da prabhuù 14
kvacit - sometimes; çyämam - swarthy; kvacit - sometimes; pétam - yellow like
ghee (clarified butter); lélä-anukaraëam - according to the nature of his lélä;
kvacit - sometimes; jagat-mohana-rüpam - the form which attracts the cosmos;
ca - and; sva-rüpam - own form; prema-dam - giving love; prabhuù - the Master.
According to the nature of the Lord's particular pleasure-pastime, He sometimes
appears as çyäma, which is a deep-blue hue like the color of a water-laden raincloud, and sometimes as péta, the brilliant yellow color of cow's ghee. The péta form
of Mahäprabhu, in which He munificently distributes love of Kåñëa, enthralls the

[p.612]
hearts of all living beings throughout the world.

darçayan çuddha-bhaktänä / manaù-çravaëa-maìgalam
ntyati gäyati rauti / hasati dhävati sukham 15
darçayan - showing; çuddha-bhaktänäm - for the pure bhaktas; manaù - mind;
çravaëa-maìgalam - auspicious to hear; ntyati - He dances; gäyati - sings; rauti roars; hasati - laughs; dhävati - runs; sukham - out of delight.
He displays that form for the sake of His pure bhaktas. To hear about and reflect
upon that form invokes auspiciousness. In that form He sometimes dances, sings,
roars, laughs and runs out of emotions of transcendental delight.

eva viharatas tasya / sarvvadänanda-rüpiëé
lélä sarvva-vraja-sthänä / präduräséd ghe ghe 16
evam - thus; viharataù - enjoying; tasya - His; sarvadä - always; änanda-rüpiëé the bliss potency; lélä - pleasure-pastimes; sarva-vraja-sthänäm - of all the Vraja
residents; präduräsét - revealed; ghe ghe - home to home.
While Çré Gauräìga was thus in a state of constant exultation, He travelled from
home to home throughout all of Vraja and revealed His pastimes that portray the
personified bliss potency.

pütanä-mokaëädiç ca / vyomäsura-vadhäntikä
vndävana-sthitä yä ca / yä ca dhämäntara gatä 17
sä tu sarvvä çakti-maté / sarvva-siddhi-pradä sadä
prema-bhakti-pradä çaçvat / pradhänä këa-rüpiëé 18
pütanä-mokaëa - Pütanä's liberation; ädiù - beginning with; ca - and; vyomaäsura-vadha-antikä - ending with the death of the sky-demon; vndävana-sthitä staying in Våndävana; yä - which pastimes; ca - and; yä - which; ca - and; dhämä-

[p.613]
antaram - other abodes; gatä - gone; sä - she; tu - indeed; sarvä - all; çakti-maté the potency-possessor; sarva-siddhi-pradä - giving all perfection; sadä - all;
prema-bhakti-pradä - giving devotional love; çaçvat - ever; pradhänä - excellence;
këa-rüpiëé - feminine form of Kåñëa.
All the manifest pastimes of Çré Kåñëa in Våndävana, beginning with the liberation
of Pütanä and ending with the slaying of the demon Vyoma, as well as the pastimes
in the Lord's other abodes of Mathurä and Dvärakä, are imbued with the totality of
divine potencies. They forever bestow all perfections. These pastimes perpetually
award devotional love, they are filled with spiritual excellences, and they are indeed
nondifferent from Kåñëa's own form.

kecid bäla nava-néta-kara ke 'pi paugaëòa-rüpa
çrédämädyair upayamunaka cärayanta ca vatsän

kaiçorädya nava-ghana-ruci veöita gopébhiç ca
vaçé-nyastädhara-kisalaya gaura-candra dadarça 19

kecit - some men; bälam - boy; nava-néta-karam - fresh butter in hand; ke api some others; paugaëòa-rüpam - form of a young boy; çrédämä-ädyaiù - with
Çrédämä and the others; upayämunakam - near the Yamunä; cärayantam tending; ca - and; vatsän - calves; kaiçora-ädyam - the beginning of fresh
adolescence; nava-ghana-rucim - new raincloud's luster; veöitam - encircled;
gopébhiù - by gopés; ca - and; vaçé-nyasta - flute placed; adhara - lips; kisalayam budding flowers; gaura-candram - the golden-moon-like Lord; dadarça - he saw.
Some of the Vraja-väsés saw Gaura Candra as a baby boy with fresh butter in His
hand, while others saw Him as a young lad tending the calves by the Yamunä with
the other cowherd boys headed by Çrédämä. Still others saw Him as a fresh
adolescent youth surrounded by the gopés, with the complexion of a newly-arrived
lightning-illuminated thundercloud, holding the bamboo flute to His lips, which
were tender like freshly sprouting flowers.

eva dstvä parama-rasikäù çréla-vndävana-sthäù
sarvve paki-mga-paçu-gaëä bäla-vddhäç ca harät

[p.614]
paçyantaù sva nija-nija-rasair hrädayantaù parétä
rädhä-këätmakam api nija menire präëa-nätham 20

evam - thus; dstvä - having seen;; parama-rasikäù - supreme rasa-relishers;
çréla-vndä-vana-sthäù - situated in splendrous Våndävana; sarve - all; paki birds; mga - deer; paçu - beasts; gaëäù - groups; bäla - boys; vddhäù - elders; ca and; harät - out of joy; paçyantaù - seeing; svam - own; nija-nija-rasaiù - by their
respective rasa; hrädayantaù - enlivened; parétäù - surrounding; rädhä-këaätmakam - Self of Rädhä-Kåñëa; api - very; nijam - own; menire - thought; präëanätham - Lord of their life-breath.
Thus seeing the Lord in great happiness, the residents of splendrous Våndävana,
including all the birds, deer and animals, as well as young and old people, all of
whom are supreme relishers of rasa, perceived Him in accordance with their
respective rasa. They surrounded Him and became immensely enlivened,
considering that this combined form of Govinda and Rädhä, Çré Caitanya, was the
one and only Lord of their life.

Thus ends the Twelfth Sarga entitled "The Narration of the Slaying of Kasa
and Other Pastimes," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Thirteenth Sarga
gopa-anugrahaù
The Lord Shows Mercy to the Gopa

tataç ca këa-däsena / darçito vraja-maëòalam
vanditaù parayä bhaktyä / präha ta karuëä-nidhiù 1

[p.615]
tataù - then; ca - and; këa-däsena - by Kåñëa Däsa; darçitaù - shown; vrajamaëòalam - the circle of Vraja; vanditaù - honored; parayä bhaktyä - with
exalted devotion; präha - He said; tam - to him; karuëä-nidhiù - ocean of mercy.
After Kåñëa Däsa had shown Vraja Maëala to Lord Çré Gauräìga, he worshipped
Him with pure devotion. Then the ocean of mercy addressed that vipra:

yathä me hdaya snigdha / këa-kathä-rasämtaiù
tathä te këa-candraç ca / prasanno bhavatu svayam 2
yathä - so; me - My; hdayam - heart; snigdham - soft; këa-kathä - Kåñëa topics;
rasa-amtaiù - by the rasa nectar; tathä - so; te - of you; këa-candraù - Kåñëa
moon; ca - and; prasannaù - very pleased; bhavatu - let it be; svayam - naturally.
"Because My heart has now become softened by hearing the rasa-filled nectar of
Kåñëa-kathä from you, therefore Kåñëa Candra Himself must naturally be very
pleased with you."

sa äha tava däso 'ha / tva këaù çré-niketanaù
tvä vinä na hi jänéyä / yathä tat kuru me prabho 3
saù - he; äha - said; tava - Your; däsaù - servant; aham - I; tvam - You; këaù the all-attractive; çré-niketanaù - the shelter of Çré, the goddess of fortune; tväm You; vinä - without; na - not; hi - indeed; jänéyäm - I may know; yathä - as; tat that; kuru - do; me - to me; prabho - O master.
Kåñëa Däsa replied, "I am Your servant, and You are Lord Kåñëa, the shelter of
goddess Çré. Without Your sanction I am incapable of knowing anything, so kindly
do with me as You see fit, O Prabhu!"

tathästv iti vara dattvä / tam äliìgya çacé-sutaù
jagan-nätha ca sasmtya / yayau brähmaëa-savtaù 4

[p.616]
tathä astu - so be it; iti - thus; varam - blessing; dattvä - giving; tam - him;
äliìgya - embracing; çacé-sutaù - the son of Çacé; jagan-nätham - Lord of the
universe; ca - and; sasmtya - recalling; yayau - He went; brähmaëa-savtaù surrounded by brähmaëas.
The son of Çacé embraced him and blessed him, saying, "So be it." Then
remembering Lord Jagannätha, He departed, surrounded by brähmaëas.

yamunä-téram äsädya / prayäga punar ägamat
veëé snätvä mädhava ca / dövä tatra sthito hariù 5
yamunä-téram - Yamunä's bank; äsädya - arriving; prayägam - the confluence
of Gaìgä, Yamunä, and Sarasvaté rivers; punaù - again; ägamat - went; veëém confluence; snätvä - bathed; mädhavam - the Deity of Bindu Mädhava; ca - and;
dövä - seeing; tatra - there; sthitaù - rested; hariù - the remover of sin.
Travelling along the bank of the Yamunä, Çré Hari again arrived at the city of
Prayäga. After bathing at the confluence of the three holy rivers, and after seeing the
Deity of Bindu Mädhava, He rested there.

tatra çré-rüpa ägatya / sänujo jagad-éçvaram
dadarça prema-sampürëo / daëòa-vat patito bhuvi 6
tatra - there; çré-rüpaù - Rüpa Gosvämé; ägatya - coming; sa-anujaù - with his
younger brother; jagat-éçvaram - the Lord of all sentient beings; dadarça - he
saw; prema-sampürëaù - filled with love; daëòa-vat - like a rod; patitaù - fell;
bhuvi - on the earth.
Çré Rüpa Gosvämé arrived there in the company of his younger brother, Anupama.
When Rüpa saw the Lord of all sentient beings, His heart filled with prema and he
fell flat like a rod to the ground.

tam äliìgya sva-caraëa / dattvä tasya çiropari

[p.617]
präha prayähi mathurä / mad-äjïä pratipälaya 7
tam - him; äliìgya - embracing; sva-caraëam - own feet; dattvä - having given;
tasya - His; çira-upari - on his head; präha - He said; prayähi - go forth;
mathuräm - to Kåñëa's birth-place; mat-äjïäm - My order; pratipälaya - cherish.
Gaura Hari embraced Çré Rüpa and blessed him by placing His feet upon his head,
saying, "Go forth to Mathurä, and always cherish My teachings.

çré-rädhä-këayor lélä / vndävana-vibhüitäm
vyakti-kariyasi tatra / mama prétir na saçayaù 8
çré-rädhä-këayoù - of Rädhä-Kåñëa; léläm - pleasure-pastime; vndä-vanavibhüitäm - the ornament of Våndävana; vyakti-kariyasi - you shall manifest;
tatra - there; mama - My; prétiù - pleasure; na saçayaù - doubtlessly.
"There you shall manifest the pastimes of Rädhä-Kåñëa, which are the ornaments
of Våndävana. Have no doubt, this will bring Me pleasure.

gauòa-deça-pathe çrémaj-jagannäthasya darçane
ägamiyasi cen mahya / darçana bhävi sarvvathä 9
gauòa-deça-pathe - on the path to Bengal; çrémat-jagat-näthasya - of Lord
Jagannätha; darçane - while seeing; ägamiyasi - you shall come; cet - if; mahyam with Me; darçanam - sight; bhävi - there will be; sarvathä - by all means.
"If you should come back by the path that leads through Gauòa in order to take
darçana of Çré Jagannätha, then at that time you can by all means also have My
association and darçana."

sa äha caraëa dhtvä / gacche 'ha päda-sevakaù
na héti bhagavän präha / gaccha tva mathurä prati 10

[p.618]
saù - he; äha - said; caraëam - feet; dhtvä - holding; gacche - I am going; aham I; pada-sevakaù - Your foot-servant; na - not; hi - certainly; iti - thus; bhagavän Lord; präha - He said; gaccha - go; tvam - you; mathuräm - to the birthplace of
Kåñëa; prati - towards.
After taking the dust of Çré Caitanya's feet, Rüpa said, "I shall now travel with You
as Your foot-servant." The Lord replied, "No, indeed you shall not. Now you must
travel to Mathurä."

evam uktvä yayau këaù / käçé brähmaëa-veçmani
sthitas taträgataù çrémän / sanätanaù prabhu-priyaù 11
evam - thus; uktvä - saying; yayau - He went; këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya; käçém Käçé; brähmaëa-veçmani - in the house of a brähmaëa; sthitaù - staying; tatra there; gataù - went; çrémän - noble; sanätanaù - Sanätana; prabhu-priyaù - dear to
Prabhu.
So saying, Kåñëa Caitanya left for Käçé, where He stayed in the house of a
brähmaëa. Then the noble Sanätana arrived, who was dear to the heart of Prabhu.

ta dñövä sahasä këa / utthäya paramädarät
dòham äliìgana ktvä / gadgadantam uväca ha 12
tam - him; dñövä - seeing; sahasä - immediately; këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya; utthäya
- rising; parama-ädarät - with extreme respect; dòham - firmly; äliìganam embrace; ktvä - made; gadgadantam - faltering; uväca - said; ha - indeed.
When He saw him, Kåñëa Caitanya at once stood up with great respect. After
embracing him firmly, He said falteringly:

çré-këa-karuëä ko 'pi / vaktu çaknoti paëòitaù
yä tvä viaya-küpa-stha / samuddhtya baléyasé 13

[p.619]
çré-këa-karuëäm - the mercy of Kåñëa; kaù api - who truly?; vaktum - to speak;
çaknoti - is able; paëòitaù - learned man; yä - which; tväm - you; viaya-küpa - the
well of sense objects; stham - situated; samuddhtya - lifted up; baléyasi powerful.
"Who is that scholar competent to describe the mercy of Kåñëa? Truly that mercy
is immeasurably powerful, for it has extricated you from the dark well of sensegratification.

çré-këa-nikaöa nétvä / tan-mädhüryyam apäyayat
sädhu sädhv iti hareëa çikayäm äsa ta punaù 14
çré-këa-nikaöam - near Çré Kåñëa; nétvä - brought; tat-mädhüryam - His
sweetness; apäyayat - it has made you drink; sädhu sädhu - very good!; iti - thus;
hareëa - with joy; çikayäm äsa - He taught; tam - him; punaù - again.
"It has brought you near Çré Kåñëa and has forced you to drink His sweetness. Very
good! Oh very good!" Highly exhilarated, Gaura instructed him further:

vndävanäya gantavya / bhakti-çästra-nirüpaëam
lupta-tértha-prakäça ca / tan-mähätmyam api sphuöam 15
vndävanäya - to Våndävana; gantavyam - should go; bhakti-çästra-nirüpaëam propounding the bhakti-scriptures; lupta-tértha - lost holy places; prakäçam revealing; ca - and; tat-mähätmyam - the glories of Kåñëa's holy abode; api - also;
sphuöam - expand.
"You must go to Våndävana. Propound the bhakti-çästras there and reveal the lost
holy places. In this way you will spread far and wide the glories of Vraja-dhäma.

kartavya bhavatä yena / bhaktir eva sthirä bhavet
yäm äçritya sukhenaiva / çré-këa-prema-mädhurém 16

[p.620]
pibanti rasikä nitya / säräsära-vicakaëäù
sa äha tvat-kpä sarva-phala-dä mama pävané 17
kartavyam - to be done; bhavatä - by your grace; yena - whereby; bhakti devotion; eva - indeed; sthirä - fixed; bhavet - may become; yäm - whom; äçritya taking shelter; sukhena - happily; eva - indeed; çré-këa-prema-mädhurém - the
sweetness of love for Kåñëa; pibanti - they drink; rasikä - the rasa-relishers;
nityam - always; sära-asära - essential and non-essential; vicakaëäù - clearsighted souls; saù - he; äha - said; tvat-kpä - Your mercy; sarva-phala-dä - giving
all fruits; mama - my; pävané - purifier.
"All this your grace must do so that the goddess of devotion, Bhakti-devi, becomes
firmly established in this world. Then by taking shelter of her, the rasikas who are
able to discern between matter and spirit may always drink with joy the sweet
beverage of Kåñëa-prema." Sanätana replied, "It is solely by Your mercy that all
these transcendental fruits may flourish, and it is by Your mercy also that my heart
may become clean."

çré-këeti tvayokta ca / tadaiva manasärthakam
hasan präha hékeças / tvam eva buddhi-sattamaù 18
çré-këa - O Çré Kåñëa; iti - thus; tvayä - by You; uktam - spoken; ca - and; tadä then; eva - indeed; manasa-arthakam - satisfying to the mind; hasan - laughing;
präha - He said; héka-éçaù - the master of the senses; tvam - you; eva - indeed;
buddhi-sattamaù - most intelligent.
"O Çré Kåñëa, all that you have spoken satisfies My mind." Håñékeça smiled and
said, "Certainly you are the most intelligent of men.

dövä madhu-puré vndäraëyam eva punar bhavän
äyäsyati jagannätha-darçanärtha mad-äjïayä 19
dövä - having seen; madhu-purém - the city of Madhu; vndä-araëyam - the

[p.621]
forest of Våndä; eva - indeed; punaù - again; bhavän - your honor; äyäsyati - you
will come; jagat-nätha-darçana-artham - for the purpose of seeing Jagannätha
Svämé; mat-äjïayä - by My order.
"After seeing the city of Madhupuré and Våndäraëya, by My order your grace must
return to see Jagannätha Svämé."

käçé-väsi-janän sarvvän / këa-bhakti-pradänataù
uddhtya kpayä këo / bhaktänä sukha-hetave 20
käçé-väsi-janän - residents of Käçé; sarvän - all; këa-bhakti-pradänataù bestowing devotion to Kåñëa; uddhtya - uplifting; kpayä - by mercy; këaù Kåñëa Caitanya; bhaktänäm - of the bhaktas; sukha-hetave - for the happiness.
Then, to bring happiness to His bhaktas, Kåñëa mercifully delivered all the
residents of Käçé and bestowed Kåñëa-bhakti on them.

sanätana samäliìgya / tapanädén yathä-sukham
jagäma sa-tvara çrémän / jagannätha-didkayä 21
sanätanam - Sanätana; samäliìgya - embracing; tapana-ädén - Tapana Miçra
and the other bhaktas; yathä-sukham - according to their pleasure; jagäma - He
went; sa-tvaram - swiftly; çrémän - splendid; jagat-nätha-didkayä - with a desire
to see Jagannätha.
After embracing Sanätana, Tapana Miçra, and the other devotees to their full
satisfaction, the illustrious Lord swiftly set off, eager to see Jagannätha Svämé.

eva sa bhagavän këaù / pathi gacchan kpä-nidhiù
dövä gopam uväceda / sa-takra-kalasa prabhuù 22
evam - thus; saù - He; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya;
pathi - on the path; gacchan - going; kpä-nidhiù - the jewel of mercy; dövä -

[p.622]
seeing; gopam - cowherd boy; uväca - said; idam - this; sa-takra-kalasam - with a
pot of diluted buttermilk; prabhuù - Master.
Then, as the all-opulent Lord Kåñëa Caitanya, the jewel of mercy, travelled on the
path, He saw a cowherd boy with a pot of buttermilk, and said to him:

pipäsito 'ha takra me / dehi gopa yathä-sukham
çrutvä parama-hareëa / sampürëa-kalasa dadau 23
pipäsitaù - thirsty; aham - I; takram - buttermilk; me - to Me; dehi - give; go-pa O cowherd; yathä-sukham - if it pleases you; çrutvä - hearing; parama-hareëa with great joy; sampürëa-kalasam - full pot; dadau - he gave.
"O gopa, I am thirsty. If it pleases you, give Me some buttermilk." Hearing this, the
cowherd boy very jubilantly gave Gaura Sundara the whole pot.

hastäbhyä kalasa dhtvä / sa-takra bhakta-vatsalaù
pétvä gopa-kumäräya / vara dattvä yayau hariù 24
hastäbhyäm - with His hands; kalasam - pot; dhtvä - held; sa-takram - with
buttermilk; bhakta-vatsalaù - fond of devotees; pétvä - having drunk; gopakumäräya - unto the cowherd boy; varam - blessing; dattvä - gave; yayau - He
went; hariù - Hari.
Lord Hari, who is affectionate to His devotees, took the pot of buttermilk in His
hands. After drinking it, He blessed the cowherd boy and then departed.

Thus ends the Thirteenth Sarga entitled "The Lord Shows Mercy to the
Gopa," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *

[p.623]
Fourteenth Sarga
çré-navadvépa-vihäre çré-gaurédäsa-anugraha
Çré Gauräìga Shows Mercy to Gaurédäsa Paëita
While Delighting in Navadvépa

eva krameëa pathi gaura-candraç / calan samäyät kuliyähva-puram
çrutvä yayus tatra mahä-nidheù kila / çréman-navadvépa-niväsinaù
pare 1
evam - thus; krameëa - gradually; pathi - on the path; gaura-candraù - the Lord
like a golden moon; calan - travelling; samäyät - arrived; kuliyä-ähva-puram the town named Kuliyä; çrutvä - hearing; yayu - they went; tatra - there; mahänidheù - of the bearer of the great treasure; kila - indeed; çréman-navadvépaniväsinaù - the residents of Navadvépa; pare - the Supreme.
As Gaura Candra travelled gradually onwards from town to town, He finally
arrived at the town of Kuliyä. When the residents of Navadvépa heard news of the
Lord, who bears the great treasure of love of God, all of them came to see Him.

dñövä prabhoù çré-mukha-paìkaja muhuù / pibanti hareëa na tptim
äpire
vadanti sarvve kta-kaëöha-väsaso / jagad-guru sneha-vaça tam
éçvaram 2
dstvä - seeing; prabhoù - of Prabhu; çré-mukha-paìkajam - lotus face; muhuù again; pibanti - they drink; hareëa - with joy; na - not; tptim - satiation; äpire get; vadanti - they say; sarve - all; kta-kaëöha-väsasaù - like those choked by
garments tied around the throat; jagat-gurum - the guru of all living beings;
sneha-vaçam - controlled by love; tam - Him; éçvaram - the Lord.
Gazing at the lotus face of Prabhu, they joyously drank of His beauty, yet remained

[p.624]
ever unsatiated. With voices choked by emotion, they all addressed the Supreme
Master and guru of all living beings, who is controlled solely by affection:

çréman-navadvépam alaìkuru prabho / saìkérttanänanda-su-magnacittaiù
sva-bhakta-vargair iti prärthitaù svaya / harir yayau tatra svanäma-kautuké 3
çréman-navadvépam - beautiful Navadvépa; alaìkuru - make an ornament;
prabho - O Prabhu; saìkértana-änanda - the joy of saìkértana; su-mugdha-cittaiù with minds bemused; sva-bhakta-vargaiù - with His group of bhaktas; iti - thus;
prärthitaù - requested; svayam - Himself; hariù - the dispeller of evil; yayau - He
went; tatra - there; sva-näma-kautuké - eager for His own names.
"O Prabhu, kindly ornament the beautiful town of Navadvépa by Your presence."
Being thus solicited by the host of His bhaktas, whose minds were immersed in the
bliss of saìkértana, Çré Hari departed with them for that town, eager to taste the
mellows of His own names.

ägatya mätuç caraëäbhivandana / bhümäu nipatya ktavän mätbhaktaù
tadaiva sä sa-tvaram eva harät / vismtya sarvva ca tam äliliìga 4
ägatya - having come; mätuù - of His mother; caraëa - feet; abhivandanam worshipping; bhümäu - on the earth; nipatya - falling; ktavän - did; mät-bhaktaù devoted to His mother; tadä - then; eva - indeed; sä - She; sa-tvaram - quickly;
eva - indeed; harät - out of joy; vismtya - forgot; sarvam - all; ca - and; tam Him; äliliìga - embraced.
That devotee of His mother approached her, fell to the ground, and worshipped her
feet. Out of sheer joy she forgot all social etiquette and at once embraced Him.

sä cumbaté këa-mukhäravinda / sieca ta vatsala-bhakti-néraiù

[p.625]
catur-vvidhenäpi rasena cänna / sambhojayitvä mudam äpa vatsalä
5
sä - she; cumbaté - kissing; këa-mukha-aravindam - Kåñëa's lotus face; sieca she sprinkled; tam - Him; vatsala-bhakti-néraiù - with the water of her
affectionate devotion; catu-vidhena - of four kinds; api - also; rasena - palatable;
ca - and; annam - food; sambhojayitvä - made Him eat; mudam - joy; äpa - got;
vatsalä - affectionate lady.
She kissed the lotus face of Kåñëa and sprinkled Him with affectionate tears of
maternal devotion. She then made Him eat food of four varieties, and derived much
joy from that.

nityänandena särddha sakala-rasa-guruù çréla-gauräìga-candro
mäträ datta parama-madhuram annam ädya ca säyam

bhuktvä vatsala-bhakti-pürëatamayä baddhas tayä çré-harir
mäträ sarvva-sukha-prado jayati sa çré-bhakta-vaçyaù prabhuù 6

nitya-änandena - with Nityänanda; särdham - in the company of; sakala-rasaguruù - the guru of all rasas; çréla-gauräìga-candraù - the moon of Çré Gauräìga;
mäträ - by His mother; dattam - given; parama-madhuram - supreme sweetness;
annam - food; ädyam - excellent; ca - and; säyam - at evening; bhuktvä - having
eaten; vatsala-bhakti-pürëatamayä - by most perfect maternal devotion; baddhaù
- bound; tayä - by her; çré-hariù - Hari; mäträ - by His mother; sarva-sukhapradaù - the giver of all joy; jayati - glories!; saù - He; çré-bhakta-vaçyaù controlled by his devotee; prabhuù - Master.
Thus at dusk, Çréla Gauräìga Candra, the guru of all rasa, received from His
mother supremely tasty and excellent foods. Çré Hari ate that food in the company of
Nityänanda, being a captive of Çacé's consummate maternal affection. All glories to
our Prabhu, the bestower of all happiness, who allows Himself to be controlled by
His devotee!

nityänando jayati satata gaura-premäbhimattaù

[p.626]
sändränandojjvala-maya-navadvépam älambamänaù

nänä-bhävaiù praëayi-nikaraiù sevyamäno nijeça
tan-nämämta-kérttanais tri-jagatä täpa-traya näçayan 7

nitya-änandaù - personified eternal bliss; jayati - glories; satatam - always;
gaura-prema-abhimattaù - delighted by love for Gaura; sändra-änanda concentrated bliss; ujjvala-maya - blazing; navadvépam - nine islands;
älambamänaù - who takes shelter; nänä-bhävaiù - with many moods; praëayinikaraiù - by a multitude of confidential associates; sevyamänaù - served; nijaéçam - own Lord; tat-näma-amta - the nectar of Gaura's names; kértanaiù - by
chanting; tri-jagatäm - of the three worlds; täpa-trayam - the three miseries;
näçayan - destroying.
Glory to Nityänanda, whose heart forever delights in Gaura-prema, who takes
shelter of Navadvépa Dhäma which shimmers with condensed bliss. He is rendered
service by a legion of confidential associates, each endowed with a unique mood. As
they chant the ambrosial names of their Lord, they nullify the three-fold miseries of
the three worlds.

prakäça-rüpeëa nija-priyäyäù / samépam äsädya nijä hi mürttim
vidhäya tasyä sthita ea këaù / sä lakmé-rüpä ca nievate prabhum 8
prakäça-rüpeëa - by a revealed form; nija-priyäyäù - for His own beloved,
Viñëu-priyä; samépam - nearness; äsädya - attaining; nijäm - own; hi - certainly;
mürtim - form; vidhäya - bestowing; tasyäm - on her; sthitaù - abiding; eaù - this;
këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya; sä - she; lakmé-rüpä - the form of Lakñmé; nievate serves; prabhum - her Master.
By the Lord's all-pervasive potency, He expanded His person in front of His
beloved Viñëu-priyä and thus made her feel near to Him. In this way, Lord Kåñëa
bestowed on her His personal presence, which abides in her heart. Thus, that form
of Lakñmé rendered service to Prabhu.

gadädhareëäpi sama rasa-jïo / gauräìga-candro viharaty ahar-

[p.627]
niçam
çréman-navadvépa-niväsibùiù saha / çré-këa-saìkérttana-magnacittaiù 9
gadädhareëa - with Gadädhara; api - also; samam - in company; rasa-jïaù - the
connoisseur of rasa; gauräìga-candraù - the moon of Gauräìga; viharati - revels;
aha-niçam - day and night; çrémat-navadvépa-niväsibùiù - with the residents of
Navadvépa; saha - with; çré-këa-saìkértana-magna-cittaiù - whose minds are
immersed in Çré Kåñëa-saìkértana.
Accompanied by Gadädhara, Gauräìga Candra, the connoisseur of rasa, revelled
day and night amidst the residents of Navadvépa, whose minds were immersed in
Çré Kåñëa-saìkértana.

çréväsa-mukhyä ye bhaktäs / teä ghe ghe prabhuù
sva-prakäçatayä pürëa-kértanänanda-däyakaù 10
çréväsa-mukhyäù - headed by Çréväsa; ye - who; bhaktäù - devotees; teäm their; ghe ghe - in home to home; prabhuù - the Master; sva-prakäçatayä - by His
ability to reveal Himself; pürëa - full; kértana-änanda-däyakaù - bestower of the
bliss of kértana.
By His ability to distribute His presence as the Supersoul, the Lord entered each
and every home of His bhaktas led by Çréväsa and endowed them with the full bliss
of kértana.

vidyä-vinoda-lélädyaiù / sapürëaù kautukädibhiù
çrédhareëa sama nitya / kréòati gaura-sundaraù 11
vidyä-vinoda - pastimes of pleasure in scholarship; léla - pastimes; ädyaiù - and
so on; sapürëaù - fully complete; kautuka-ädibhiù - by prank-playing and so on;
çrédhareëa - with Khola-veca Çrédhara; samam - in association; nityam eternally; kréòati - He plays; gaura-sundaraù - the beautiful golden Lord.

[p.628]
The fully complete Personality of Godhead, Lord Gaura-sundara, enjoys His
pleasure pastimes of scholarship and prank-playing, forever frolicking in the
company of Çrédhara, the salesman of banana products.

tato nityänanda-gaura-candrau sarvveçvareçvarau
jayatä gauré-däsäkhya-paëòitasya ghe prabhü 12
tataù - then; nityänanda-gaura-candrau - Nityänanda and Gaura Candra; sarvaéçvara-éçvarau - the controllers of the controllers of all; jayatäm - glory be!; gaurédäsa-äkhya-paëòitasya - of the scholar named Gaurédäsa; ghe - in the home;
prabhü - the two Lords.
Glory to the two Prabhus, the controllers of all universal controllers, who dwell in
the home of Gaurédäsa Paëita.

tasya premnä nibaddhau tau / prakäçya rucirä çubhäm
mürtti svä svä rasaiù pürëä / sarvva-çakti-samanvitäm 13
tasya - his; premnä - by his love; nibaddhau - bound up; tau - They; prakäçya revealed; ruciräm - radiance; çubhäm - sublime; mürtim - form; sväm sväm - own
respective forms; rasaiù - with qualities; pürëäm - complete; sarvva-çaktisamanvitäm - filled with all potencies
Gaura and Nitäi became bound up by the power of Gaurédäsa's love. In his home
They revealed the sublime splendor of Their Deity forms, which are complete in all
the potencies of Their Lordships.

dadataù parama-prétau / nivasantau yathä-sukham
täbhyä saha bhuktavantäv / anna ca vividha rasam 14
dadataù - They gave; parama-prétau - very pleased; nivasantau - residing; yathäsukham - at Their pleasure; täbhyäm - with Them; saha - together; bhuktavantau -

[p.629]
enjoyed; annam - foods; ca - and; vividham - different kinds; rasam - flavors.
Being very satisfied with him, They pleasantly took up residence there and enjoyed
a variety of tasty foods through those Deity forms.

dövä tau sac-cid-änanda-vigrahau dvija-sattamaù
çuddha-sakhya-rasenäpi / sevayäm äsa sarvvadä 15
dövä - seeing; tau - They; sat-cit-änanda-vigrahau - forms of eternity, bliss and
knowledge; dvija-sattamaù - the exalted brähmaëa; çuddha-sakhya - of pure
friendship; rasena - by the taste; api - very; sevayäm äsa - served; sarvadä forever.
Looking upon those two forms of eternity, bliss and knowledge, that exalted
brähmaëa always renders Them service in the mellow of pure friendship (sakhyarasa).

sarvve nityäù çäçvatäç ca / dehäs tasya mahätmanaù
hänopädäna-rahitä / iti vedänusärataù 16
sarve - all; nityäù - eternal; çäçvatäù - imperishable; ca - and; dehäù - bodies;
tasya mahätmanaù - of the Supreme Soul; häna - diminution; upädäna - material
cause; rahitäù - free from; iti - this; veda - the Veda; anusärataù - according to.
As accepted by the Vedas, all the forms of the Supreme Soul are eternal,
imperishable, and free from diminution as well as the material laws of cause and
effect.

çré-lélä-vigrahäù sarvve / bhakta-citte nirantaram
tiöhanti paramänanda-däyino bhakta-vatsaläù 17
çré-lélä-vigrahäù - glorious pastime forms; sarve - all; bhakta-citte - in the heart
of a bhakta; nirantaram - incessantly; tiöhanti - they reside; paramänanda-

[p.630]
däyinaù - the givers of transcendental happiness; bhakta-vatsaläù - affectionate
to their bhaktas.
The Deities are all pastime forms of the Lord. They incessantly reside within the
hearts of Their pure bhaktas, awarding them transcendental happiness and
reciprocating affectionately with them.

Thus ends the Fourteenth Sarga entitled "Çré Gauräìga Shows Mercy to
Gaurédäsa Paëita While Delighting in Navadvépa," in the Fourth Prakrama of
the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Fifteenth Sarga
navadvépa-vihära-çré-puruottama-darçanam
Pleasure Pastimes in Navadvépa and Darçana of Jagannätha Svämé

tataç ca këa-caitanya-nityänandau jagad-gurü
çrélädvaitäcärya-geha / jagmatuù prema-vihvalau 1
tataù - then; ca - and; këa-caitanya-nityänandau - Gaura and Nitäi; jagat-gurü the gurus of all sentient beingy; çréla-ädvaita-äcäryam - the incarnation of a
devotee; geham - to the house; jagmatuù - they went; prema - love; vihvalau overwhelmed.
Then Kåñëa Caitanya and Nityänanda, the two gurus of all sentient beings, went to
the house of Çréla Advaitäcärya while immersed in prema.

tau dövä sahasotthäyädvaitäcäryo maheçvaraù
sa-gaëaù prema-vivaço / dhtvä tac-caraëämbujam 2

[p.631]
tau - Them; dövä - having seen; sahasä - suddenly; utthäya - rising; advaitaäcäryaù - the avatära of a devotee; mahä-éçvaraù - great controller; sa-gaëaù with his men; prema-vivaçaù - overcome with love; dhtvä - held; tat-caraëaambujam - Their lotus feet.
When Advaita _cärya, who is the plenary portion of Lord Çiva, saw Gaura-Nitäi
coming, he and his men immediately rose and fell clasping Their lotus feet,
overcome with love of God.

prakalya vidhivad dharät / pétvä çirasi dhärayan
nanartta väso dhunväno / matta-keçari-vikramaù 3
prakalya - bathing; vidhi-vat - by vaiñëava principle; harät - out of joy; pétvä drinking; çirasi - on His head; dhärayan - holding; nanarta - danced; väsaù garment; dhunvänaù - waving; matta-keçari - maddened lion; vikramaù prowess.
After Çré Advaita bathed Their feet, in accord with the vaiñëava precept, He
ecstatically drank that footwash and clasped Their feet upon His head. Then with
the vigor of a intoxicated lion, He danced and waved His upper cloth in the air.

tam äliìgya prahareëa / praëamya ca punaù punaù
tena sampüjitau prétau / çäly-anna-bhojanädinä 4
tam - Him; äliìgya - embracing; prahareëa - with great gladness; praëamya bowing down; ca - and; punaù punaù - again and again; tena - by Him;
sampüjitau - worshipped; prétau - pleased; çäli-anna-bhojana-ädinä - foods
beginning with rice.
In great jubilation, He embraced Them and prostrated Himself repeatedly on the
ground before Them. Then, to Their loving delight, He offered Them elaborate
worship as well as many fine foods beginning with rice.

[p.632]
saìkérttana-sukhe magnau / tena särddha jagad-gurü
ntyantau bhakta-vargaiç ca / veöitau parameçvarau 5
saìkértana - the congregational chanting of Kåñëa's names; sukhe - in the
happiness; magnau - immersed; tena särdham - with Him; jagat-gurü -two gurus
of the cosmos; ntyantau - dancing; bhakta-vargaiù - by the assembly of bhaktas;
ca - and; veöitau - surrounded; parama-éçvarau - two supreme controllers.
Thereafter those two Supreme Personalties, who had appeared as the gurus of all
living entities, became immersed in the joy of saìkértana in company with Advaita
_cärya and danced, surrounded by the assembled bhaktas.

tata äcäryaù sahasä / bähyam äsädya sa-tvaram
änäyya çré-navadvépät / sa-bhaktä çré-çacé tu täm 6
tataù - then; äcäryaù - Çré Advaita; sahasä - suddenly; bähyam - outside; äsädya
- went; sa-tvaram - quickly; änäyya - brought; çré-navadvépät - from Navadvépa;
sa-bhaktäm - with the devotees; çré-çacém - Mother Çacé; tu - indeed; täm - her.
Then the _cärya suddenly went outside and swiftly brought Çré Çacé Devé from
Navadvépa along with the devotees from that area.

bubhuje sa tayä cäpi / tathä vaiëava-patnébhiù
saha päcitam anna ca / päyasädi-catur-vvidham 7
bubhuje - He ate; saù - He; tayä - by her; ca - and; api tathä - as well; vaiëavapatnébhiù - with the wives; saha - in company; päcitam - cooked; annam - food;
ca - and; päyasa-ädi - sweet rice and so on; catu-vidham - four kinds.
Gaura ate the foodstuffs of four kinds, beginning with the sweet rice that was
cooked by her and the wives of the vaiñëavas.

puré-çré-mädhavaù këa-premänanda-sukhärëavaù

[p.633]
tasyäpy ärädhana-tithau / caitrasya çukla-pakake 8
dvädaçyä bhojayäm äsa / dvau prabhü sägraha mudä
tathä bhakta-gaëän sarvvän / äcäryo 'dvaita éçvaraù 9
puré-çré-mädhavaù - Mädhavendra Puré; këa-prema - of love of Kåñëa; änandasukha-arëavaù - blissful ocean of happiness; tasya - his; api - indeed; ärädhanatithau - on the date of worship; caitrasya - of the month Caitra; çukla-pakake on the bright fortnight; dvädaçyäm - on the twelfth day; bhojayäm äsa - He fed;
dvau prabhü - the two Prabhus; sa-agraham - with enthusiasm; mudä - gladly;
tathä - also; bhakta-gaëän - the group of devotees; sarvän - all; äcäryaù - the
teacher of bhakti; advaita-éçvaraù - the Supreme Lord, Advaita.
Çré Mädhava Puré is a blissful ocean of Kåñëa-premänanda. On His appearance
day, the dvädaçé of the bright fortnight in the month of Caitra, the Supreme Lord
Advaitäcärya eagerly fed the two Prabhus as well as the entire assembly of devotees.

tasyä tena sama këa-caitanya-vallabhena ca
svaya mahä-prasäda hi / bhuktvänandam aväpnuyät 10
tasyäm - on that date; tena - with Him; samam - in the company; këa-caitanyavallabhena - with the beloved of Kåñëa Caitanya; ca - and; svayam spontaneously; mahä-prasädam - great mercy of the Lord; hi - certainly; bhuktvä having eaten; änandam - joy; aväpnuyät - got.
At that holy festival, Advaitäcärya felt heartfelt änanda while eating mahä-prasäda
in the company of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya and His beloved Nitäi.

çré-mädhava-puré-prema-rasau çré-çacé-nandanau
hari-saìkérttanänandau / bhaktaiù saha nanarttatuù 11
çré-mädhava-puré-prema-rasau - tasting the mellows of Çré Mädhava Puré's
love; çré-çacé-nandanau - the sons of Çacé; hari-saìkértana-änandau - feeling the

[p.634]
bliss of Hari saìkértana; bhaktaiù - with the devotees; saha - together;
nanartatuù - danced.
The two sons of Çacé tasted the rasa of Çré Mädhava Puré's love, felt the bliss of
Hari-näma-saìkértana, and danced along with all the devotees.

eva ktvä dina tatra / sthitvä mät-vaçänugau
tä prasädya madhurayä / girä saçäta-vigrahau 12
evam - thus; ktvä - done; dinam - day; tatra - there; sthitvä - passed; mätvaçänugau - submissive followers of Their mother; täm - her; prasädya - having
pleased; madhurayä - with sweet; girä - words; saçäta-vigrahau - two handsome
forms.
The two handsome Lords passed the day there as submissive followers of Their
mother and pleased her very much by Their sweet words.

äcäryädén bhakta-gaëän / tathä çréväsaka prabhum
sasäntvayya sukhenäpi / gamanäya ktodyamau 13
äcärya-ädén - Çré Advaita, etc.; bhakta-gaëän - the assembly of devotees; tathä also; çréväsakam - the pure devotee; prabhum - the master; sasäntvaya pacifying; sukhena - congenially; api - and; gamanäya - for departure; ktaudyamau - made attempt.
After charmingly pacifying the hearts of the _cärya and the other bhaktas,
especially Çréväsa Prabhu, They attempted to depart.

teä vikréòita ke' pi / varëayanti mahätmanäm
yathä këe madhu-puré-gate çré-vraja-väsinaù 14
teäm - Their; vikréòitam - playful talk; ke api - who indeed?; varëayanti - can
describe; mahä-ätmanäm - of those great souls; yathä - as; këe - when Lord

[p.635]
Kåñëa; madhu-puré-gate - went to Madhu-puré; çré-vraja-väsinaù - the residents
of Vraja.
Who indeed can describe the play of all those great souls? They seemed like the
Vraja-väsés as Kåñëa departed for Madhupuré.

tiöhanti tan-mayäù sarvve / tathaite vaiëavottamäù
cintayantaç ca tal-lélä / babhüvus tan-mayäù kila 15
tiöhanti - they stood; tat-mayäù - absorbed in Them; sarve - all; tathä - also; ete they; vaiëava-uttamäù - topmost vaiñëavas; cintayantaù - meditating on; ca and; tat-léläm - Their pastimes; babhüvuù - were; tat-mayäù - having an identical
mood as Them; kila - truly.
All those topmost vaiñëavas remained standing there with their minds absorbed in
Gaura and Nitäi, and contemplated Their divine pastimes until they verily became
of one nature with Them.

këa-rämau ca täv etau / tatra te ca mahattamäù
upameya-gatir jïeyäù / këa-präëä babhuù sadä 16
këa-rämau - the two divine brothers; ca - and; täu - Those; etau - These; tatra there; te - they; ca - and; mahattamäù - greatest of the great souls; upameya-gatiù
- the process of comparison; jïeyäù - the things to be known; këa-präëäù - the
life-breaths of Kåñëa; ubhau - both; sadä - always.
Those same two Persons, who had appeared formerly as Kåñëa and Räma, had
come again as Gaura and Nitäi. The supremely great devotees who held Kåñëa
dearer than their life-breath could understand these things by means of comparison.

tataù svaya çré-jagad-éçvaräv ubhau / çrémaj-jagannäthadidkayänvitau
prajagmatuù çré-puruottama prabhü / sva-bhakta-vndaiù

[p.636]
parisevitau dhruvam 17
tataù - then; svayam - Themselves; çré-jagat-éçvarau - the two controllers of the
universe; ubhau - both; çrémat-jagat-nätha-didkayä - with the desire to see Lord
Jagannätha; anvitau - both filled with; prajagmatuù - went; çré-puruottamam Jagannätha Puré; prabhü - the two Lords; sva-bhakta-vndaiù - by Their own
devotees; parisevitau - both nicely served; dhruvam - truly.
Then those two Lords of the universe, desiring the vision of Jagannätha, travelled
on to the Lord's eternal abode of Çré Puruñottama. As They travelled, the group of
devotees in Their company rendered the two Prabhus all service.

ägatya ketra bhuvanaika-bandhü / dövä jagannätha-mukhäravindam
premäçru-pürëau kala-dhauta-vigrahau / babhüvatur gadgadaruddha-kaëöhakau 18
ägatya - arriving; ketram - Puré; bhuvana-eka-bandhü - the two sole friends of
the worlds; dövä - having seen; jagat-nätha - the Lord of the universe; mukhaaravindam - lotus face; prema-açru - tears of love; pürëau - both filled; kaladhauta-vigrahau - two golden forms; babhüvatuù - They were; gadgada faltering; ruddha-kaëöhakau - both throats choked.
Upon Their arrival at Kñetra, those two Persons, who are the sole source of
friendship for the peoples of the worlds, saw the lotus face of Jagannätha Svämé.
Then Their golden bodies became bathed by tears of prema, Their throats choked-up
and Their words came falteringly.

çré-käçé-miçrasya ghe gatau punaù / çré-räma-këau kila bhaktaveöitau
çré-särvvabhäumädaya eva sarvve / taträgatäù ketra-niväsino 'pare
19
çré-käçé-miçrasya - of Çré Käçé Miçra; ghe - in the house; gatau - went; punaù -

[p.637]
again; çré-räma-këau - Kåñëa Caitanya and Nityänanda Räma; kila - indeed;
bhakta-veöitau - surrounded by bhaktas; çré-särvabhäuma-ädayaù - headed by
Särvabhauma; eva - indeed; sarve - all; tatra - there; ägatäù - came; ketraniväsinaù - residents of Kñetra; apare - other.
Surrounded by devotees, Çré Räma and Kåñëa again entered the house of Käçé
Miçra. Then all of Their intimate associates headed by Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya as
well as all other residents of Kñetra assembled there.

paçyanti tat-päda-saroja-vaibhava / praëamya bhümau praëipatya
te mudä
baddhäïjalé säçru-vilola-locanäù / sa-gadgada këa-rasäbdhimagnäù 20
paçyanti - they see; tat-päda-saroja - Their lotus feet; vaibhavam - glory;
praëamya - bowing down; bhümau - on the earth; praëipatya - falling down; te they; mudä - gladly; baddha-aïjalém - folded hands; sa-açru - with tears; vilolalocanäù - rolling eyes; sa-gadgadam - with stammering; këa-rasa-abdhi - ocean
of Kåñëa rasa; magnäù - merged.
On seeing the glory of Their Lordships' lotus feet, they fell to the ground and
blissfully offered obeisances. Then, with hands folded in supplication, reeling eyes
filled with tears, and choked voices they became drowned in the ocean of the
mellows of Kåñëa.

utthäya tau sa-tvaram eva tän api / äliìgya premnä hi mudänvitau
prabhü
vndävanasya madhura kathämta / çuçrävayäm äsatur eva mäna-dau
21
utthäya - rising; tau - They two; sa-tvaram - swiftly; eva - indeed; tän - they; api
- even; äliìgya - embracing; premnä - with love; hi - certainly; muda-anvitau filled with gladness; prabhü - the Prabhus; vndävanasya - of Våndävana;

[p.638]
madhuram - sweet; kathä-amtam - nectar of the topics; çuçrävayäm äsatu - they
narrated; eva - indeed; mäna-dau - giving respect.
The two Prabhus quickly rose and lovingly, happily and respectfully embraced
them all. Then They narrated the Våndävana-kathämtam, sweet nectar tales of
Våndävana.

Thus ends the Fifteenth Sarga entitled "Pleasure-Pastimes in Navadvépa and
Darçana of Jagannätha Svämé," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Sixteenth Sarga
pratäpa-rudra-anugrahaù
The Lord Shows Mercy to Pratäpa Rudra Mahäräja

tato gaja-paté räjä / darçanärtha mahäprabhoù
särvvabhauma samähüya / rämänanda-samanvitam 1
tataù - then; gaja-pati - the lord of many elephants, title of the king of Utkala
(Orissa); räjä - king; darçana-artham - in order to have a sight; mahäprabhoù - of
Mahäprabhu; särvabhaumam - the Bhaööäcärya; samähüya - summoned;
rämänanda-samanvitam - in the company of Rämänanda Räya.
Then the king of Utkala, lord of many elephants, desired to have darçana of
Mahäprabhu. He summoned Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya together with Rämänanda
Räya.

papraccha sa-tvara prétaù / sädara vinayänvitaù

[p.639]
darçana gaura-candrasya / sägrajasya katha bhavet 2
papraccha - he asked; sa-tvaram - quickly; prétaù - lovingly; sa-ädaram - with
respect; vinaya-anvitaù - with humility; darçanam - a sight; gaura-candrasya - of
Gaura-candra; sa-agrajasya - with His elder brother; katham - how?; bhavet - it
may be.
In a loving mood, with respect and humility, he asked them by what means he
could obtain darçana of Gaura Candra and His elder brother.

sa präha ta mahä-räja / darçana durghaöa tava
upäyäntaram äsädya / kartavya na tu sammukham 3
saù - he; präha - said; tam - to him; mahä-räja - O great king; darçanam - sight;
durghaöam - difficult to get; tava - for you; upäya - means; antaram - other;
äsädya - attaining; kartavyam - to be done; na - not; tu - but; sammukham - face
to face.
Särvabhauma said to him, "Mahäräja, for a king like yourself, it is difficult to have
the Lord's darçana. You should adopt some other means to see Him.

yadä saìkérttanänanda-mattau tau parameçvarau
tadaiva te mahä-räja / karttavya darçana tayoù 4
yadä - when; saìkértana-änanda-mattau - delighted by the joy of saìkértana;
tau - the two; parama-éçvarau - supreme controllers; tadä - then; eva - indeed; te your; mahä-räja - O great king; kartavyam - to be done; darçanam - sight; tayoù of the two.
"When those two Supreme Lords become intoxicated by the joy of saìkértana,
then, O great king, you may attempt to see Them."

bhadram eva tathä käryya / yathä çighra bhaved dvija

[p.640]
iti präha samutkaëöho / räjä prahasitänanaù 5
bhadram - blessing; eva - indeed; tathä - so; käryam - endeavor; yathä - as;
çighram - speedily; bhavet - it may be; dvija - O brähmaëa; iti - thus; präha - he
said; samutkaëöhaù - very eagerly; räjä - the king; prahasita-änanaù - with a
brightly smiling face.
The king eagerly replied with a brightly smiling face, "O brähmaëa, kindly bless
this endeavor so it may soon take place."

tadaiva kértanänanda-mattau tau parameçvarau
çrutvä räjä samäsädya / dadarça karuëärëavau 6
tadä - then; eva - indeed; kértana-änanda-mattau - the two delighted in the joy
of kértana; tau - the two; parama-éçvarau - two Supreme Lords; çrutvä - hearing;
räjä - the king; samäsädya - came; dadarça - he saw; karuëä-arëavau - the two
oceans of mercy.
Later, when the king was informed that the Supreme Lords were tasting the
delights of congregational kértana, he came and gazed upon those two oceans of
mercy.

açru-kampa-pulakädyair / näsä-läla-mukhämtaiù
maëòitau tau samudvékya / räjäçru-pulakänvitaù 7
açru - tears; kampa - trembling; pulaka - eruptions; ädyaiù - and so on; näsäläla-mukha-amtaiù - by nectarean saliva from Their noses and mouths; maëòitau
- decorated; tau - the two; samudvékya - gazing; räjä - the king; açru-pulakaanvitaù - covered by tears and erect hairs.
The Lords' bodies were decorated by tears, eruptions and trembling, and from
Their noses and mouths flowed nectarean saliva. Gazing upon those two Lords thus
ornamented, the king also wept and his hairs thrilled in rapture.

[p.641]
yayau sva-bhavana prétaù / suptaù svapne dadarça tau
ratna-sihäsana-sthau ca / kérttanänanda-vigrahau 8
yayau - he went; sva-bhavanam - to his own house; prétaù - pleased; suptaù slept; svapne - in a dream; dadarça - he saw; tau - the two; ratna-siha-äsana-sthau
- seated on bejewelled lion seats; ca - and; kértana-änanda-vigrahau - forms of
the bliss of kértana.
Very satisfied, he returned to his home and went to sleep. Then in a dream he saw
the two Lords. Their forms exhibited the bliss of kértana, and They were seated
upon jewelled lion-thrones.

tataù pralambäri-mura-dviau sukha / paçyan sadä pürëa-viläsavaibhavau
ki ki bruvan bhümi-patan sunirbhara / punaù samutthäya dadarça
tau prabhü 9
tataù - then; pralamba-ari - the enemy of Pralamba, Balaräma; mura-dviau - the
enemy of Mura, Jagannatha; sukham - happily; paçyan - seeing; sadä - always;
pürëa-viläsa-vaibhavau - filled with the glories of Their pastimes; kim kim what? what?!; bruvan - saying; bhümi-patan - falling to the earth; su-nirbharam with great force; punaù - again; samutthäyya - rising; dadarça - he saw; tau - the
two; prabhü - Masters.
With great happiness, he beheld those enemies of Pralamba and Mura, perpetually
and totally absorbed in Their glorious pastimes. "Oh! What is this? What is this?"
Pratäpa Rudra cried as he fainted, falling to the earth with great force. When he
arose, he again saw the two Prabhus.

eva sa vära-traya eva svapna / dövä rudan prema-vibhinnadhairyyaù
tataù samutthäya jagäma sa-tvara / gauräìga-pädämbujayoù
samépakam 10

[p.642]
evam - thus; saù - he; vära-trayam - thrice; eva - indeed; svapnam - dream; dövä
- seeing; rudan - weeping; prema-vibhinna-dhairyaù - composure lost through
love; tataù - then; samutthäya - rising; jagäma - he went; sa-tvaram - quickly;
gauräìga-päda-ambujayoù - of the lotus feet of Gauräìga; samépakam - near.
Thrice he saw this dream. Losing all sobriety because of prema, he wept. Then
arising swiftly he went nearby Gauräìga's lotus feet.

praëamya säöäìgam asau punaù punaù / nipatya bhümau ca rudan
muhur mmuhuù
dhtvä prabhoù çré-caraëämbuja hdi / tuöäva sarvveçvaram ädipuruam 11
praëamya - bowing down; sa-aöa-aìgam - with the six limbs; asau - he; punaù
punaù - repeatedly; nipatya - falling; bhümau - on the earth; ca - and; rudan weeping; muhuù muhuù - more and more; dhtvä - held; prabhoù - of the Master;
çré-caraëa-ambujam - lotus feet; hdi - in his heart; tuöäva - he satisfied; sarvaéçvaram - the Lord of all; ädi-puruam - original Person.
Again and again he arose and fell to the earth before them offering obeisances.
Then weeping profusely and holding the lotus feet of Prabhu to his heart, he offered
praises to the Lord of all beings, the first among all persons:
jaya jaya jagad-éça prema-pürëa-prakäça / sakala-jana-niväsänanda-bhogendraçäyin
nija-jana-mati-matta-bhìga-cumbi-sva-päda- / sarasija-virahärtta pähi mä dénabandho 12

jaya jaya - glories!; jagat-éça - O Lord of the universe; prema-pürëa-prakäça O revealer of the full measure of love; sakala-jana-niväsa - O resident in the
hearts of all beings; änanda-bhoga-indra-çäyin - who reclines on the coils of the
best of snakes; nija-jana - own man; mati - desire; matta-bhìga - intoxicated bee;
cumbi - kissing; sva-päda-sarasija - lotus feet; viraha-ärtam - afflicted by

[p.643]
separation; pähi - protect; mäm - me; déna-bandho - O friend of the distressed.
"Glories! Glories, O Lord of the universe! You are the revealer of the complete
spectrum of love of God! O You who reside in the hearts of all beings! You who lie
on the bed of Ananta Çeña Näga, the king of snakes! Friend of the distressed! Kindly
protect me, Your own man. I am afflicted by separation from Your lotus feet, like an
intoxicated bee hankering to kiss them."

eva stuvanta n-pati jagat-patiù / çìgära-poa nija-vaibhava prabhuù
çré-vigraha aò-bhujam adbhuta mahat / pradarçayäm äsa mahävibhütiù 13
evam - thus; stuvantam - praising; n-patim - protector of men; jagat-patiù protector of the universe; çìgära-poam - abundance of ornaments; nijavaibhavam - own glories; prabhuù - Master; çré-vigraham - radiant form; aöbhujam - six-armed; adbhutam - wonderful; mahat - great; pradarçayäm äsa displayed; mahä-vibhütiù - great opulence.
While the king offered praise, Mahäprabhu, the protector of all sentient beings,
displayed a radiant form of six-arms. That form was embellished by copious
ornaments, and it revealed His own greatness. It was wonderful, magnificent and
filled with immense opulence.

pürëänanda parama-madhura darçayan gaura-candraù
premoddämo jayati satata ghürëayan netra-bhìga

nityänandaù svayam api bala divya-mädhuryya-pürëa
premonmädaiù çubham api nija vigraha çänta-rüpam 14

pürëa-änandam - filled with bliss; parama-madhuram - ultimate charm;
darçayan - showing; gaura-candraù - the Golden Moon; prema-uddämaù unbounded love; jayati - glories; satatam - ever; ghürëayan - rolling; netrabhìgam - eye-bees; nitya-änandaù - ever blissful; svayam - Himself; api - very;
balam - Balaräma; divya-mädhurya - divine sweetness; pürëa - complete; premaunmädaiù - with the madnesses of love; çubham - sublime; api - although; nijam -

[p.644]
personal; vigraham - form; çänta-rüpam - form of peace.
Glory to the golden moon of Kåñëa Caitanya, who displays unbounded love,
complete joy and ultimate charm. His eyes forever rove to and fro like bees in search
of honey. Glory to the forever-blissful Nityänanda, who is Balaräma Himself. His
personality is filled with divine sweetness, and intoxicated by Gaura-prema His
form is sublimely personal and peaceful.

ürddhva hasta-dvayam api dhanur-bbäëa-yukta ca madhya
vaçé-vakaù sthala-vinihitam uttama gaura-candraù

çea-hasta-dvaya ca parama-sumadhura ntya-veça sa bibhrat
eva çré-gaura-candra npa-patir akhila prema-pürëa dadarça 15

ürddhvam - above; hasta-dvayam - a pair of hands; api - also; dhanur-bäëayuktam - having bow and arrow; ca - and; madhyam - middle; vaçé - flute; vakaù chest; sthala - broad; vinihitam - placed; uttamam - excellent; gaura-candraù; çeahasta-dvayam - the last pair of hands; ca - and; parama-sumadhuram - very
graceful; ntya-veçam - attitude of dancing; ca - and; bibhrat - holds; evam - thus;
çré-gaura-candram - the Golden Moon; npa-patiù - the king; akhilam - complete;
prema-pürëam - filled with love; dadarça - he saw.
With His upper pair of hands, Gaura Candra brandished a bow and arrow, with the
middle pair He held an excellent flute to His broad chest, and the lower pair of
hands were held in a very graceful dancing posture. Thus the monarch saw the
complete form of Gaura Candra, which was filled with love of Kåñëa.

dövä çré-hari-rämayoù su-madhurä çré-räsa-lélä smaran
premäçrü-pulakävtaù katipayän çlokän paöhan ntyati

çrémad-bhägavatasya tasya parama mädhurya-särasya ca
çré-gopé-jana-maëòalé-çubha-gayoù svänanda-bhävonmadaiù 16

dövä - having seen; çré-hari-rämayoù - of Hari and Räma; su-madhuräm - very
sweet; çré-räsa-léläm - the räsa dance; smaran - remembering; prema-açrü - tears
of love; pulaka - with erect hairs; ävtaù - covered; katipayän - a few; çlokän -

[p.645]
verses; paöhan - reciting; ntyati - He dances; çrémat-bhägavatasya - from the
spotless Puräëa; tasya - His; paramam - supreme; mädhurya-särasya - of the
essence of sweetness; ca - and; çré-gopé-jana-maëòalé - who makes a dance-circle
with the gopés; çubhagayoù - of the two elegant songs; sva-änanda - with their
own bliss; bhäva-unmadaiù - with ecstatic madnesses.
Having seen that six-armed form of the Lord, Pratäpa Rudra Mahäräja was
reminded of the intense sweetness of Çré Hari and Räma's räsa-lélä pastimes, and his
body became covered by ecstatic eruptions and tears of love. Thus, while dancing he
recited a few auspicious verses describing Kåñëa and Balaräma amidst the assembled
gopés, which form the supreme relishable essence of Çrémad Bhägavatam. He recited
them in an ecstatic intoxicated mood arising from his own spiritual bliss.
çré-bhägavate daçama-skandhe catus-triçatitamädhyäye:

kadäcid atha govindo / rämaç cädbhuta-vikramaù
vijahratur vane rätryä / madhya-gau vraja-yoitäm 17
çré-bhägavate - in the Çrémad Bhägavatam; daçama-skandhe - in the Tenth
Canto; catu-triçatitama-adhyäye - in the Thirty-fourth Chapter; kadäcit - once;
atha - then; govindaù - the giver of pleasure to the cows, senses and land; rämaù the reservoir of pleasure; ca - and; adbhuta-vikramaù - of amazing prowess;
vijahratuù - took pleasure; vane - in the forest; rätryäm - at night; madhya-gau went in the midst; vraja-yoitäm - of the women of Vraja.
It is stated in the Çrémad Bhägavatam, Tenth Canto, Thirty-fourth Chapter, verses
20 - 23: "Once Govinda and Räma, the performers of superhuman feats, enjoyed at
night in the forest-bowers in company with the milkmaids of Vraja.

upagéyamänau lalita / stré-janair baddha-sauhdaiù
sv-alaìktänuliptäìgau / sragvinau virajo 'mbarau 18
upagéyamänau - Their glories being sung; lalitam - charmingly; stré-janaiù - by
the womenfolk; baddha-sauhdaiù - cherished out of affection; su-alaìkta - nicely
decorated; anulipta-aìgau - limbs smeared with (sandalwood pulp); srak-vinau -

[p.646]
garlanded; virajaù - spotless; ambarau - garments.
"Their glories were charmingly sung by those womenfolk who were entangled in
affection with Them. The Lords were artfully decorated with ornaments, and Their
limbs were smeared with the pulp of sandal. They wore flower garlands and spotless
garments.

niçä-mukha mänayantäv / uditoòupa-tärakam
jagatuù sarvva-bhütänä / manaù çravaëa-maìgalam 19
niçä-mukham - the mouth of night (evening); mänayantau - honoring; udita rising; uòupa - moon; tärakam - stars; jagatuù - They sang; sarva-bhütänäm - for
all living beings; manaù - the hearts; çravaëa - the ears; maìgalam - happiness.
"The two Lords sang, honoring the approach of dusk and the rising of the moon
and stars. Their songs delighted the ears and hearts of all living beings."

dövä aò-bhuja-vigraha prabhu-vara çrémat çacé-nandana
räma rohiëé-putram eva pulakaiù sammaëòitäç cäçrubhiù

pürëäù sarvva-mahaj-janäç ca satata çré-särvvabhaumädayaù
çré-këa-guëa-kértanämta-rase magnä vihastä babhuù 20

dövä - seeing; aö-bhuja - six-armed; vigraham - form; prabhu-varam - best of
Lords; çrémat - illustrious; çacé - of Çacé; nandana - the delight; rämam - the
reservoir of pleasure; rohiëé-putram - the son of Rohiëé; eva - indeed; pulakaiù by erect hair; sammaëòitäù - fully decorated; ca - and; açrubhiù - by tears; pürëäù
- full; sarva-mahat-janäù - all the great souls; ca - and; satatam - always; çrésärvabhauma-ädayaù - Çré Särvabhauma and the others; çré-këa-guëa - the
qualities of Çré Kåñëa; kértana-amta - the nectar of kértana; rase - in the rasa;
magnäù - immersed; vihastäù - overwhelmed; babhuù - became.
When all the great souls headed by Särvabhauma saw their great Master, the
illustrious son of Çacé, displaying His six-armed form, and Nityänanda Räma
appearing as Balaräma, the son of Rohiëé, they also became completely decorated by

[p.647]
tears and thrill-bumps. Thus they became overwhelmed and immersed in singing
immortal nectarean songs describing the qualities of Çré Kåñëa.

Thus ends the Sixteenth Sarga entitled "The Lord Shows Mercy to Pratäpa
Rudra Mahäräja," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Seventeenth Sarga
bhakta-goöha-melanam
The Assembly of Devotees

atha bhakta-gaëäù sarve / ye ye gauòa-niväsinaù
gantum icchanti gauräìga-darçanäya néläcalam 1
atha - once; bhakta-gaëäù - the group of bhaktas; sarve - all; ye ye - whoever;
gauòa-niväsinaù - residents of Bengal; gantum - to go; icchanti - were desiring;
gauräìga-darçanäya - for a sight of Gauräìga; néla-acalam - to the temple like an
unmoving blue mountain (Jagannätha Puré).
Once all the bhaktas residing in Gaua desired to go to Néläcala to see Çré Gauräìga.

äcäryaù çrémad-advaita / éçvaro jagatä guruù
sa-gaëaù paramänandaù / çréväsaù saha bhrätbhiù 2
äcäryaù çrémat advaitaù - the splendid Advaita; éçvaraù - Supreme Lord;
jagatäm - of the universes; guruù - weighty teacher; sa-gaëaù - with His group;
parama-änandaù - very jolly; çréväsaù - the pure devotee; saha bhrätbhiù - with
his brothers.

[p.648]
There was Çré Advaitäcärya, the Supreme Lord and guru of all living entities in the
company of His associates, and also Çréväsa häkura, who was in a very blissful
mood, together with his brothers.

äcäryaù ratnaù çré-candra-çekharäcärya eva ca
puëòarékäkako vidyä-nidhiù prema-nidhis tathä 3
äcäryaù ratnaù - the Jewel Teacher; çré-candra-çekhara-äcärya; eva - indeed; ca
- and; puëòaréka-akakaù - the lotus eyed; vidyä-nidhiù - the ocean of wisdom;
prema-nidhiù - the ocean of love; tathä - also.
There was Candra Çekhara, known as the Jewel _cärya, and Puëòarékäkña
Vidyänidhi, also known as Prema-nidhi.

gaìgä-däsäkhyakaç caiva / paëòitaù sad-guëänvitaù
vakreçvaraù paëòitaç ca / pradyumna-brahmacäry api 4
hari-däsäkhya-öhakkuro / haridäsa-dvijas tathä
çré-väsudeva-dattaù çré-mukunda-datta eva ca 5
çré-çivänanda-senaç ca / putra-därä-samanvitaù
çré-govinda-ghoa eva / mukunda-gäyakottamaù 6
lekhako vijayaç caiva / çré-sadä-çiva-paëòitaù
puruottamaù saïjayaç ca / çrémän-äkhyaka-paëòitaù 7
çré-nandanäkhyako brahmacäré çuklämbaras tathä
khola-veceti vikhyätaù / sa bhakta-çrédharaù sukhé 8
gaìgä-däsa äkhyakaù - the teacher of Viçvambhara; ca - and; eva - indeed;
paëòitaù - scholar; sat-guëa-anvitaù - filled with good qualities; vakra-éçvaraù

[p.649]
paëòitaù - the master of twists, a scholar; ca - and; pradyumna-brahmacäré; api also; hari-däsa - the incarnation of Brahmä; äkhya - known; öhakkuraù - as good
as God; haridäsa-dvijaù; tathä - also; çré-väsudeva-dattaù - the incarnation of
Prahläda Mahäräja; çré-mukunda-dattaù; eva - indeed; ca - and; çré-çivänandasenaù - the maintainer of the devotees; ca - and; putra-därä-samanvitaù - with
his wife and sons; çré-govinda-ghoaù; eva - indeed; mukunda-gäyaka-uttamaù Mukunda the excellent singer; lekhakaù - writer; vijayaù; ca - and; eva - indeed;
çré-sadä-çiva-paëòitaù; purua-uttamaù - transcendental personality; saïjayaù; ca and; çrémän; äkhyaka - known as; paëòitaù - scholar; çré-nandana; äkhyaù known as; brahmacäré - celibate; çuklämbaraù; tathä - also; khola-veca - banana
salesman; iti - thus; vikhyätaù - renowned; saù - he; bhakta-çrédharaù; sukhé happy.
There was also the scholar known as Gaìgädäsa, who was endowed with godly
qualities, as well as Vakreçvara Paëita and Pradyumna Brahmacäré. Both häkura
Haridäsa and Dvija Haridäsa were there, as well as Väsudeva Datta and Mukunda
Datta. Çré Çivänanda Sena also came along with his wife and sons. Indeed Govinda
Ghoa was there with Mukunda, the best of singers. There was the scribe Vijaya, the
scholar Sadäçiva, Puruñottama, Saïjaya, and Çrémän Paëita. There were the
brahmacärés, Çré Nandana and Çuklämbara, and also the famous self-satisfied bhakta
named Çrédhara, who was known as Khola-vechä, the salesman of banana products.

lekhaka-paëòitaç caiva / gopénäthäkhya-paëòitaù
çré-garbha-paëòitaç cäpi / paëòito vana-mälikaù 9
jagad-éça-paëòitaç ca / hiraëyäkhyäç ca vaiëavaù
buddhi-mantäkhya-khänaç ca / äcäryaù çré-purandaraù 10
räghava-paëitaç caiva / vaidya-siha-murärikaù
çré-garuòa-paëòitaç caiva / gopénäthäkhya-sihakaù 11
çré-räma-paëòitaç caiva / çré-näräyaëa-paëòitaù
dämodaraù paëòitaç ca / raghunandana-öhakkuraù 12

[p.650]
çré-mukunda-narahari-ciraïjéva-sulocanäù
rämänanda-vasuç caiva / satyaräjädayas tathä 13
lekhaka-paëòitaù - writer and scholar; ca - and; eva - indeed; gopénätha; äkhya called; paëòitaù - scholar; çré-garbha-paëòitaù; ca - and; api - also; paëòitaù; vanamälikaù; jagat-éça-paëòitaù; ca - and; hiraëya; äkhyäù - called; ca - and; vaiëavaù
- the devotee of the Lord; buddhi-manta; äkhya - called; khänaù - emperor; ca and; äcäryaù çré-purandaraù; räghava-paëitaù; ca - and; eva - indeed; vaidya-siha
- lion among physicians; murärikaù; çré-garuòa-paëòitaù; ca - and; eva - indeed;
gopénätha; äkhya - called; sihakaù - lionlike; çré-räma-paëòitaù; ca - and; eva indeed; çré-näräyaëa-paëòitaù; dämodaraù paëòitaù; ca - and; raghunandanaöhakkuraù; çré-mukunda; narahari; ciraïjéva; sulocanäù; rämänanda-vasuù; ca and; eva - indeed; satyaräja; ädayaù - and so on; tathä - also.
There was the writer and scholar, Gopénätha Paëita, as well as Çré Garbha Paëita
and Paëita Vanamälé. There was Jagadéça Paëita, Vaiñëava Hiraëya, Buddhimanta
Khäna and _cärya Çré Purandara, Çré Räghava Paëita, Muräri, the lion among
physicians, Garuòa Paëita and Gopénätha Siha, Çré Räma Paëita, Çré Näräyaëa
Paëita, Dämodara Paëita and Raghunandana häkura, Çré Mukunda, Narahari,
Ciraïjéva, Sulocana, Rämänanda Vasu, Satyaräja and others.

sarve çré-këa-caitanya-pränäù prema-samanvitäù
äcäryya-prabhunä särddham / äyayuù puruottamam 14
sarve - all; çré-këa-caitanya-pränäù - who held the Lord as their life-breath;
prema-samanvitäù - endowed with prema; äcärya-prabhunä - with the _cärya;
särdham - in company; äyayuù - went; puruottamam - Jagannätha Puré.
All of these bhaktas were as attached to Çré Kåñëa Caitanya as to their own lifebreath. Thus in a mood of great love, they travelled to Puruñottama Dhäma along
with Advaita Prabhu.

çréman-narendram äyätän / bhaktän sarveçvaro hariù

[p.651]
nikaöa-sthän bhakta-gaëän / preäyäm äsa sa-tvaram 15
çréman-narendram - the splendid lake of the king; äyätän - coming; bhaktän devotees; sarva-éçvaraù - controller of all; hariù - the remover of evil; nikaöasthän - situated near Him; bhakta-gaëän - groups of devotees; preäyäm äsa sent; sa-tvaram - quickly.
Çré Hari, the Master of all, immediately sent the group of devotees who were
standing near Him to receive the arriving bhaktas at Narendra Sarovara.

päçcäd eva svayam api / gantu cakre manaù prabhuù
bhakta-präëo bhakta-vaço / bhaktänä préti-daù sadä 16
päçcät - afterwards; eva - indeed; svayam - Himself; api - also; gantum - to go;
cakre manaù - fixed His mind; prabhuù - the Master; bhakta-präëaù - life force of
His devotee; bhakta-vaçaù - controlled by His devotee; bhaktänäm - for His
devotees; préti-daù - giver of love; sadä - always.
Afterwards He, who is the very life force of His devotees, who is controlled by His
devotees and who bestows love on His devotees, determined to set forth.

nityänanda-prabhuç caiva / paëòitaù çri-gadädharaù
puré-çré paramänando / bhaööa-çré-särvabhaumakaù 17
paëòita jagadänandas / tathä çré-käçé-miçrakaù
dämodara-svarüpaç ca / paëòitaù çaìkaras tathä 18
çré-käçéçvara-gosvämé / paëòito bhagaväs tathä
çréla-pradyumna-miçra çré-paramänanda-pätrakaù 19
çré-rämänanda-räyaç ca / govindo dvära-pälakaù
brahmänanda-bhäraté ca / çri-rüpaù çré-sanätanaù 20

[p.652]
nityänanda-prabhuù; ca - and; eva - indeed; paëòitaù çri-gadädharaù; puré-çré
paramänandaù; bhaööa-çré-särvabhaumakaù; paëòita jagadänandaù; tathä - also;
çré-käçé-miçrakaù; dämodara-svarüpaù; ca - and; paëòitaù çaìkaraù; tathä - also;
çré-käçéçvara-gosvämé; paëòitaù bhagavän; tathä - also; çréla-pradyumna-miçra; çréparamänanda-pätrakaù; çré-rämänanda-räyaù; ca - and; govindaù; dvära-pälakaù door watchman; brahmänanda-bhäraté; ca - and; çré-rüpaù; çré-sanätanaù.
Nityänanda Prabhu together with Paëita Çré Gadädhara, Puri Çré Paramänanda, and
Bhaööa Çré Särvabhauma, Paëita Jagadänanda and Çré Käçé Miçra, Dämodara Svarüpa
and Paëita Çaìkara, Çré Käçéçvara Gosvämé, Paëita Bhagavän, Pradyumna Miçra and
Çré Paramänanda Pätra, Çré Rämänanda Räya and Govinda, the Lord's doorman,
Brahmänanda Bhäraté, Çré Rüpa and Çré Sanätana...

çré-raghunätha-däsaç ca / vaidyaù çré raghunäthakaù
çré-näräyaëa-nandäkhya / äcärya-putra-nandanaù 21
acyutänanda-gosvämé / gauräìga-präëa-vallabhaù
çikhi-mäheti vikhyäto / väëé-näthas tathäpare 22
ye ksetra-väsino bhaktä / äyayuù prabhuëä saha
etaiù samanvitaù këa-caitanyo bhakta-vatsalaù 23
çré-narendra-saras-téram / ägataù parameçvaraù
taträdvaito 'pi bhagavän / sa-bhaktaù samupasthitaù 24
çré-raghunätha-däsaù; ca - and; vaidyaù - physician; çré raghunäthakaù; çrénäräyaëa-nanda; äkhya - named; äcärya-putra-nandanaù - the delightful son of
Çré Advaita; acyutänanda-gosvämé; gauräìga-präëa-vallabhaù - whose life force is
his love for Gauräìga; çikhi-mäheti; vikhyätaù - renowned; väëé-näthaù; tathä also; apare - others; ye - who; ksetra-väsinaù - residents of Kñetra; bhaktäù - the
devotees; äyayuù - went; prabhuëä - with Prabhu; saha - with; etaiù - with them;
samanvitaù - accompanied; këa-caitanyaù - the avatära for the age of quarrel;

[p.653]
bhakta-vatsalaù - affectionate to His devotees; çré-narendra-saraù - the lake of
the King; téram - bank; ägataù - came; parama-éçvaraù - supreme Lord; tatra there; advaitaù - Advaita; api - also; bhagavän - Lord; sa-bhaktaù - with His
devotees; samupasthitaù - approached.
...Çré Raghunätha Däsa and the physician Raghunätha, Çré Näräyaëa Nanda and the
delightful son of Advaita _cärya named Acyutänanda Gosvämé, whose life and soul
was the love he held for Çré Gauräìga, the renowned Çikhi-Mäheti as well as
Vänénätha and all the other bhaktas who resided in Kñetra went along with their
Prabhu. In their company, the Supreme Master, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, whose heart is
always filled with affectionate for His devotees, came to the bank of Narendra
Sarovara, where at that very moment the great Personality Çré Advaita was arriving
with the devotees from Gaua-deça.

ubhayor darçanäd eva / sarvve jäta-mahotsaväù
açru-kampädayo bhävä / mürtimantas tadä babhuù 25
ubhayoù - of the two; darçanät - by seeing; eva - indeed; sarve - all; jäta-mahäutsaväù - became very festive; açru-kampa-ädayaù - tears, trembling and so on;
bhäväù - ecstacies; mürtimantaù - personification; tadä - then; babhuù - were.
When the two parties of devotees glimpsed one another, everyone became
extremely enlivened by a spontaneous festive spirit, and it seemed as if the various
symptoms of ecstasy such as weeping and trembling appeared in personified form at
that place.

Thus ends the Seventeenth Sarga entitled "The Assembly of Devotees," in the
Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *

[p.654]
Eighteenth Sarga
narendra-sarovara-vihäraù
Pleasure Pastimes in Narendra Sarovara

bhävam äsädya te sarvve / paramänanda-vihvaläù
namanti daëòavat bhümau / hari-dhvani-samanvitäù 1
bhävam - ecstasy; äsädya - attained; te - they; sarve - all; parama-änanda supreme bliss; vihvaläù - overwhelmed by; namanti - they bow down; daëòa-vat like rods; bhümau - on the earth; hari-dhvani-samanvitäù - accompanied by the
utterances of "Hari!"
All of the devotees experienced feelings of ecstasy and became overwhelmed by
transcendental bliss. They bowed down to one another, falling flat like rods upon
the earth, and their mouths became filled with utterances of "Hari!"

éçvaro 'pi namaç cakre / vaiëavaiù saha vaiëavän
darçayann äçramädénä / vaiëavärädhane vidhim 2
éçvaraù - Supreme Lord; api - although; namaù cakre - made obeisances;
vaiëavaiù saha - with the vaiñëavas; vaiëavän - to the vaiñëavas; darçayan showing; äçrama-ädénäm - among spiritual and social positions; vaiëavaärädhane - in worship of a vaiñëava; vidhim - principle.
Although He is the Supreme Lord, Çré Gauräìga also offered obeisances to the
vaiñëavas along with the other vaiñëavas, showing that despite all spiritual and
social positions the principle of honoring the vaiñëava is of paramount importance.

api cet su-duräcäro / bhajate mäm ananya-bhäk
sädhur eva sa mantavya / iti këa-mukhoditam 3
api - although; cet - if; su-duräcäraù - very misbehaved; bhajate - he worships;
mäm - Me; ananya-bhäk - with no other shelter; sädhuù - a saint; eva - indeed;

[p.655]
saù - he; mantavyaù - to be considered; iti - thus; këa-mukha - from the mouth
of Kåñëa; uditam - uttered.
"Even though a person may perform the most degraded deed, if he worships Me,
giving up all other interest, he should be accepted as a sädhu." So spoke Çré Kåñëa
(Bhagavad Gétä 9.30).

prakäçya jana-saìghänä / hitäya jagad-éçvaraù
vaiëavän vandana cakre / nyäsädi-mada-khaëòanam 4
prakäçya - revealing; jana-saìghänäm - of the groups of people; hitäya - for the
welfare; jagat-éçvaraù - the supreme controller of the universe; vaiëavän devotees of the Lord; vandanam - worship; cakre - did worship; nyäsa-ädi headed by the sannyäsés; mada - pride; khaëòanam - breaking.
Revealing this principle for the benefit of all classes of men, the Jagadéçvara
performed worship of the vaiñëavas and thus smashed the false pride of persons in
high positions, beginning with those in the sannyäsa order.

kampäçru-pulaka-vyäptä / dhüli-maëòita-vigrahäù
ntyantaç ca namantaç ca / gäyantaç ca punaù punaù 5
kampa-açru-pulaka - trembling, tears and erect hairs; vyäptäù - covered; dhülimaëòita - decorated by dust; vigrahäù - forms; ntyantaù - dancing; ca - and;
namantaù - bowing down; ca - and; gäyantaù - singing; ca - and; punaù punaù repeatedly.
The vaiñëavas' bodies became pervaded by trembling, tears, and eruptions. While
dancing and singing, they were ornamented by the dust of the earth as they offered
prostrated obeisances to each other again and again.

gauräìga-darçanänanda-mattäù sva na vidanti te
gauräìga jaya gauräìga / gauräìga iti vädinaù 6

[p.656]
gauräìga-darçana-änanda-mattäù - delighted by the happiness of seeing Lord
Gauräìga; svam - themselves; na - not; vidanti - they knew; te - they; gauräìga the golden Lord; jaya - glories!; gauräìga; gauräìga; iti - thus; vädinaù - they
uttered.
Being intoxicated by the joy of seeing Çré Gauräìga, they became oblivious to their
own bodies and thus chanted, "Gauräìga! Jaya Gauräìga! Gauräìga!"

tathä vaiëava-patnyaç ca / düre dövä mahä-prabhum
täsä prema-parä-käöhä / ko veda ko 'pi savadet 7
tathä - also; vaiëava-patnyaù - the wives of the vaiñëavas; ca - and; düre - from
afar; dövä - seeing; mahä-prabhum - the great Master; täsäm - their; prema-paräkäöhäm - excellence of transcendental love; kaù - who?; veda - knows; kaù api who indeed?; savadet - can speak.
As the wives of the vaiñëavas gazed upon Mahäprabhu from a distance, they also
chanted, "Jaya Gauräìga!" Indeed, who is able to comprehend their transcendental
excellence of prema, and who is qualified to speak of it?

tatas tä çré-harer bhakti-savyäpinyo na saçayaù
çré-këa-näma-pürëäsyäù / premäçru-pulakänvitäù 8
tataù - then; tä - they; çré-hare - of Çré Hari; bhakti-savyäpinyaù - pervaded by
devotion; na - not; saçayaù - doubt; çré-këa-näma - names of Kåñëa; pürëa filled; äsyäù - mouths; prema-açru - tears of love; pulaka-anvitäù - covered by
erect hairs.
Without a doubt, their hearts were wholly pervaded by devotion for Çré Hari, their
mouths filled with the names of Kåñëa, their bodies covered by tears of love, and
their bodily hairs thrilled by rapture.

tadaiva räma-këau çré-yäträ-govinda eva ca

[p.657]
jala-kréòärtha äyätau / narendra-sarasi dhruvam 9
tadä - then; eva - indeed; räma-këau - the divine duo; çré-yäträ-govindaù - the
moveable festival Deity of Govinda; eva - indeed; ca - and; jala-kréòa - water
sports; artham - for the purpose of; äyätau - came; narendra-sarasi - in the king's
lake; dhruvam - actually.
Then, as the festival Deity of Çré Govinda entered within Narendra Sarovara to play
water sports, Räma and Kåñëa also entered the water.

mahä-vibhüti-sayuktä / hari-saìkérttanädibhiù
maëòitä bhakta-vargaiç ca / gaura-govinda-kiìkaräù 10
mahä-vibhüti - great opulence; sayuktäù - endowed with great opulence; harisaìkértana - the congregational chanting of Hari's names; ädibhiù - and so on;
maëòitäù - enhanced by; bhakta-vargaiù - with the groups of devotees; ca - and;
gaura-govinda-kiìkaräù - the servants of the golden Govinda.
The personal servants of Gaura Govinda, who were decorated very opulently, came
with Them, accompanied by the various groups of bhaktas performing
congregational chanting of Çré Hari's holy names.

nävam äsädya tävac ca / viharanto mahä-mudaù
govinda-räma-këäç ca / kurvvanti jala-kautukam 11
nävam - boat; äsädya - getting on; tävat - for so long; ca - and; viharantaù enjoying; mahä-mudaù - very joyous; govinda - the festival form of Jagannätha;
räma-këäù - Gaura and Nitäi; ca - and; kurvanti - did; jala-kautukam - waterrevelries.
As soon as They had boarded the boat, the Govinda Deity along with Räma and
Kåñëa enjoyed great delight by engaging in water sports.

[p.658]
sa-bhakto gaura-candraç ca / jalam äviçya kautuké
gadädhara-rasolläsé / nityänanda-sukha-pradaù 12
sa-bhaktaù - with His devotees; gaura-candraù - the Golden Moon; ca - and;
jalam - water; äviçya - entering; kautuké - eagerly; gadädhara; rasa-ulläsé delighted in rasa; nityänanda - the original form of a devotee; sukha-pradaù gave joy.
Gaura Candra together with His devotees eagerly entered the waters. He delighted
in His rasa with Gadädhara, and gave joy to Nityänanda.

advaitäcäryya-preöhaç ca / svarüpädyaiù samanvitaù
kréòati paramänandam / yamunäyä yathä purä 13
advaitäcärya-preöhaù - most dear to Advaita; ca - and; svarüpa-ädyaiù - with
Svarüpa-Dämodara and the others; samanvitaù - together with; kréòati - He
sported; parama-änandam - in transcendental bliss; yamunäyäm - in Yamunä;
yathä - as; purä - in a former time.
There in the company of all the bhaktas who were led by Svarüpa, the beloved of
Advaita sported in a mood of transcendental festivity, just as in a former age He had
once sported within the waters of Yamunä.

sa sanätana-rüpa-çré-raghunätheçvaro hariù
muräri-räma-çréväsa-gaurédäsa-priyo 'pi yaù 14
paramänanda-puré-vaçé-rämänanda-sahäyavän
käéçvara-mäna-dätä / hari-däsa-priyaìkaraù 15
saù - He; sanätana-rupa-çré-raghunätha-éçvaraù - the Lord of these devotees;
hariù - the dispeller of sin; priyaù - their beloved; api - also; yaù - who;
paramänanda-puré-vaçé-rämänanda; sahäyavän - took company from; käéçvara;
mäna-dätä - gave honor to; hari-däsa; priyam-karaù - made dear.

[p.659]
Çré Hari, who is the Lord of the hearts of Sanätana, Rüpa and Raghunätha, who is
dear to the hearts of Muräri, Räma, Çréväsa and Gaurédäsa, accepted assistance from
Paramänanda Puré, Vaçé and Rämänanda. He gave honor to Käçéçvara and charmed
the heart of Haridäsa.

sva-prakäçatayä sarvva-bhaktaiç ca vipineçvaraù
sahaiva kréòati gaura-govindaù çacé-nandanaù 16
sva-prakäçatayä - by His personal expansion; sarva-bhaktaiù - with all the
bhaktas; vipina-éçvaraù - Lord of the forests; saha - with; kréòati - plays; gauragovindaù - Golden Govinda; çacé-nandanaù - the son of Çacé.
Through His all-pervasive potency, Gaura Govinda, the Lord of the forest glades of
Vraja and the delight of the heart of Çacé, sported individually with every one of His
bhaktas.

sarvve jänanti kréòati / gauräìgo hi mayä samam
tena särdha bhakta-gaëäù / kurvvanti jala-kautukam 17
sarve - all; jänanti - knew; kréòati - He sports; gauräìgaù - the Golden Lord; hi certainly; mayä - with me; samam - with; tena - with Him; särdham - with;
bhakta-gaëäù - the groups of bhaktas; kurvvanti - they do; jala-kautukam - water
sports.
Each of them knew that, "Gauräìga sports only with me." Thus did the entire
group of bhaktas perform water sports with Çré Caitanya.

gopébhiù saha govindo / yamunäyä yathä purä
akarod vividhä kréòä / çré-räsa-rasa-kautuké 18
yathä gopé-janäù këa / jala-kréòa-paräyaëam
sukhayanti nija-prema-viläsa-nava-vibhramaiù 19

[p.660]
gopébhiù - with the milkmaids; saha - in company with; govindaù - the awarder
of joy to the cows, the land and the senses; yamunäyäm - in Yamunä; yathä - as;
purä - before; akarot - He performed; vividhäm - various; kréòäm - sports; çréräsa - relationships with many girls; rasa-kautuké - eager for the rasa; yathä - as;
gopé-janäù - the gopés; këam; jala-kréòa - water sports; paräyaëam - absorbed in;
sukhayanti - give pleasure; nija-prema - His own love; viläsa - diversions; nava novel; vibhramaiù - with amorous gestures.
In a former time within Yamunä's waters Çré Govinda eagerly relished the mellows
of räsa-lélä, and He played a variety of games with the milkmaids of Vraja. And the
gopés also gave pleasure to Kåñëa, who was enthusiastic for water sports, through
their feminine gestures and novel amorous dalliances to provoke His love.

eva jala-vihära ca / kärayitvä yathocitam
gauräìgo räma-këau çré-yäträ-govinda eva ca 20
utthiöhanti jala-hradäd / bhüitä bhüaëottamaiù
püjitäç copahäraiç ca / sva-sva-bhtya-samanvitäù 21
evam - so; jala-vihäram - water sports; ca - and; kärayitvä - having enacted;
yathä-ucitam - suitably; gauräìgaù; räma-këau - the divine duo; çré-yäträgovinda - the moveable Deity of Jagannätha-deva; eva - indeed; ca - and;
utthiöhanti - they rose; jala-hradät - from the waters of the lake; bhüitäù decorated; bhüaëa-uttamaiù - by excellent ornaments; püjitäù - worshipped; ca and; upahäraiù - by offerings; ca - and; sva-sva-bhtya - Their personal servitors;
samanvitäù - together with.
In the same way, Çré Gauräìga enacted water-sports with His bhaktas in a manner
just suitable to His different relationships with them. Thereafter, the festival Deity
of Govinda in the company of Räma and Kåñëa rose from the waters of the lake.
They were then decorated by exquisite ornaments and honored by valuable
presentations, being cared for by Their personal servitors.

[p.661]
ntya-vädya-su-gänädyair / mandira prayayuù sukham
räma-këau ca çré-yäträ-govindaù sva-janaiù saha 22
ntya - dancing; vädya - music; su-gäna - fine songs; ädyai - and so on;
mandiram - temple; prayayuù - they went forward; sukham - happily; rämakëau - Gaura and Nitäi; ca - and; çré-yäträ-govindaù - the festival Deity of
Govinda; sva-janaiù - with His servants; saha - together.
Räma and Kåñëa with Çré-Yäträ-Govinda proceeded happily towards Their temple,
accompanied by Their servants, who danced, played musical instruments and sang
sweetly.

gauräìgaç ca nijair bhaktaiù / këa-saìkérttanaiù paraiù
sama bhaktäveçatayä / yayau çré-hari-mandiram 23
gauräìgaù; ca - and; nijaiù bhaktaiù - with His own devotees; këa-saìkértanaiù
- congregational chanting of Kåñëa's names; paraiù - who were absorbed; samam
- in the company; bhakta-äveçatayä - with absorption in the mood of a devotee;
yayau - He went; çré-hari-mandiram - to the temple of Hari.
Absorbed in the mood of a devotee, Gauräìga went towards the mandira of Çré
Hari along with His own devotees, who were absorbed in Kåñëa-saìkértana.

jagannätha-mukha dövä / sa-bhaktaù prema-vihvalaù
garuòa-stambham äçritya / sthito darçana-lälasaù 24
jagannätha-mukham - the face of Jagannätha; dövä - seeing; sa-bhaktaù - with
His devotees; prema-vihvalaù - overwhelmed by love; garuòa-stambham - the
pillar of Garuda; äçritya - taking shelter; sthitaù - standing; darçana-lälasaù eager for the vision.
Then taking shelter behind the pillar of Garua-deva, He stood amongst His
devotees, eager to get a glimpse of the Lord, and when He saw the face of

[p.662]
Jagannätha, He became overwhelmed with love.

nityänanda-sukholläsé / bhakta-varga-samanvitaù
dvau pärçve paçyati gaura-candro räma-janärddanau 25
nityänanda-sukha-ulläsé - Nityänanda, shining with happiness; bhakta-vargasamanvitaù - with His group of devotees; dvau - the two; pärçve - on the sides;
paçyati - He gazes; gaura-candra - the Golden Moon; räma-janärdanau Balaåäma and Jagannätha.
In the company of the bhaktas, Gaura Candra shone in perpetual bliss as He gazed
at Balaräma and Jagannätha on both sides of the altar.

Thus ends the Eighteenth Sarga entitled "Pleasure Pastimes in Narendra
Sarovara," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Nineteenth Sarga
çrémad-advaita-prabhu-kta çré-gauräìga-kérttanam
Çrémad Advaita Prabhu Performs Gauräìga Kértana

tato bhakta-gaëaiù särddha / nityänanda-dhtaù prabhuù
käçénätha-gha çéghram / ägato jagad-éçvaraù 1
tataù - then; bhakta-gaëaiù - with the devotees; särdham - with; nityänandadhtaù - held by Nityänanda; prabhuù - the Master; käçénätha-gham - to the house
of Käçénätha; çéghram - swiftly; ägato - went; jagat-éçvaraù - the Lord of all
sentient beings.

[p.663]
Thereafter supported by Nityänanda, the Lord of the cosmic manifestation swiftly
went to the home of Käçénätha Miçra in the company of His bhaktas.

jagannätha-prasädänna / nityänanda-samanvitaù
çréla-advaitädibhiù särddha / svarüpädyair niveditam 2
jagannätha-prasäda-annam - the food tasted and given as mercy by Lord
Jagannätha; nityänanda; samanvitaù - associating with; çréla-advaita-ädibhiù with Çréla Advaita and others; särdham - with; svarüpa-ädyaiù - headed by
Svarüpa Dämodara; niveditam - offered.
Gaura Hari along with Nityänanda, Çréla Advaita, and other bhaktas, were offered
the prasäda food-remnants of Lord Jagannätha by the group of devotees headed by
Svarüpa.

bhuktvä catur-vvidha dravya / bhakta-saìkalpa-pälakaù
bhojayäm äsa svän bhaktän / putra-präyeëa lälayan 3
bhuktvä - having eaten; catu-vidham - four kinds; dravyam - ingredients;
bhakta-saìkalpa-pälakaù - fulfiller of the devotee's desires; bhojayäm äsa - fed;
svän - own; bhaktän - His beloved; putra-präyeëa - just like sons; lälayan cherishing.
After He had eaten the four kinds of foodstuffs, Gaura fed His devotees, indulging
them as a father would His sons by satisfying their every wish.

sva bhuìkva bhuìkva bhuìkveti vätsalya-rasa-mürttimän
jagad-änanda-svarüpädyair / dvärair eva dayä-nidhiù 4
svam - own; bhuìkva, bhuìkva, bhuìkva - eat! eat! eat!; iti - thus; vätsalya-rasamürtimän - the personification of paternal affection; jagadänanda-svarüpaädyaiù - headed by Jagadänanda and Svarüpa; dväraiù - by means of; eva indeed; dayä-nidhiù - ocean of compassion.

[p.664]
The ocean of compassion who appeared like paternal affection personified was
assisted by Jagadänanda, Svarüpa, and others as He encouraged His devotees, "Eat!
Eat! You must eat!"

eva krameëa pratyaka / sambodhya kauçalänvitaù
sambhojya bhüri-dravyeëa / cätur-vvidhyena vaiëavän 5
evam - thus; krameëa - one by one; pratyakam - directly; sambodhya - having
instructed; kauçala-anvitaù - with expertise; sambhojya - to be eaten; bhüridravyeëa - with many ingredients; cätu-vidhyena - with four kinds; vaiëavän vaiñëavas.
Thus the Lord exhibited great expertise as He personally encouraged the vaiñëavas
one by one to eat the food of four varieties, which was prepared with many fine
ingredients.

gaëòüñädi-kriyäù sarvva / samäpya jagad-éçvaraù
candana-pupa-mäläbhyä / bhüayitvä yathä-kramam 6
gaëòüña - a handful of water; ädi - headed by; kriyäù - activities; sarvam - all;
samäpya - having performed; jagat-éçvaraù - Lord of the cosmos; candana-pupamäläbhyäm - with sandalwood pulp and flower garlands; bhüayitvä - adorning;
yathä-kramam - in order.
Then after making everyone refresh their mouths by sipping handfuls of water
mixed with cloves and nutmeg, the Jagadéçvara adorned them in the order of their
seniority with pulp of sandal and flower garlands.

nityänandädvaita-mukhyän / bhaktän gauòa-niväsinaù
utkala-sthän api çveta-dvépa-sthän vaiëavän prabhuù 7
lälayäm äsa karuëo / vätsalyäd bhakta-vatsalaù

[p.665]
taiù sama sukham äsénaù / saìkérttana-kutühalé 8
nityänanda - the original form of a devotee; ädvaita - the incarnation of a
devotee; mukhyän - headed by; bhaktän - devotees; gauòa-niväsinaù - residents
of Bengal; utkala-sthän - residents of Orissa; api - also; çveta-dvépa-sthän residents of Çveta-dvépa, Våndävana; vaiëavän - the devotees; prabhuù - the
Master; lälayäm äsa - He cherished; karuëaù - kind; vätsalyät - out of affection;
bhakta-vatsalaù - affectionate to His devotees; taiù samam - with them; sukham comfortably; äsénaù - seated; saìkértana - congregational chanting; kutühalé enthused by.
First Prabhu honored and cherished the vaiñëavas residing in Gaua, headed by
Nityänanda and Advaita, and then those of Utkala and Çvetadvépa. The kind-hearted
Lord, out of affection for His devotees, then sat at ease in their company, eager to
perform saìkértana.

räjäjïayä mahä-pätraç / candaneçvara-saìjïakaù
bhaktän niväsayäm äsa / gehe gehe yathä-sukham 9
räja-äjïayä - by order of the king; mahä-pätraù - the prime minister;
candaneçvara; saìjïakaù - known as; bhaktän - the devotees; niväsayäm äsa gave accomodation; gehe gehe - in various houses; yathä-sukham - according to
their pleasure.
Next, by the order of the king, the prime minister named Candaneçvara provided
residence for the bhaktas in various houses, according to their preference.

eva bhakta-gaëäù sarvve / saìkértana-paräyaëäù
tiöhanti prabhuëä särddha / saìkértana-vinodinä 10
eva - thus; bhakta-gaëäù - devotees; sarve - all; saìkértana - congregational
chanting; paräyaëäù - absorbed; tiöhanti - stay; prabhuëä särdham - with Prabhu;
saìkértana - congregational chanting; vinodinä - who took pleasure.

[p.666]
However, all the bhaktas were eager for saìkértana and thus elected to stay with
Mahäprabhu, who also delighted in saìkértana.

prabhu-prétaye yad-dravya / tair änéta prayatnataù
tena vaiëava-patnébhiù / päcita paramädarät 11
prabhu-prétaye - for the pleasure of Prabhu; yat - which; dravyam ingredients; taiù - by them; änétam - brought; prayatnataù - with much care; tena
- on His account; vaiëava-patnébhiù - by the wives of the vaiñëavas; päcitam cooked; parama-ädarät - with great reverence.
For the pleasure of Mahäprabhu, the wives of the vaiñëavas cooked with great
reverence the foodstuffs they had carefully brought for Him from Bengal.

anna catur-vvidhenäpi / rasena sahita prabhuù
bubhuje ca ghtaiù sikta / sa-bhaktaù sägrajaù sukhé 12
annam - food; catu-vidhena - of four kinds; api - also; rasena - flavorful;
sahitam - with; prabhuù - the Master; bubhuje - ate; ca - and; ghtaiù - with ghee;
siktam - sprinkled; sa-bhaktaù - with His bhaktas; sa-agrajaù - with His elder
brother; sukhé - happy.
Together with His elder brother and His bhaktas, Prabhu happily ate the four
varieties of flavorful foodstuffs, which were sprinkled with ghee.

advaito bhagavän säkät / svayam odanam uttamam
paktvä su-madhura cäpi / nétvä ta bhäryayä saha 13
advaitaù - non-different (from Nityänanda); bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord;
säkät - directly; svayam - personally; odanam - rice; uttamam - excellent; paktvä having cooked; su-madhuram - very sweet; ca - and; api - also; nétvä - brought;
tam - that; bhäryayä saha - by His wife.

[p.667]
Bhagavän Çré Advaita personally prepared very relishable sweet rice from some
fine grains His wife had brought.

nibhta bhojayäm äsa / kéa ghta-samanvitam
sva-präëa-vallabha këa-caitanya bhakta-vatsalam 14
nibhtam - in solitude; bhojayäm äsa - gave to eat; kéam - cooked-down milk
and rice; ghta-samanvitam - with ghee; sva-präëa-vallabham - the love of His
very life; këa-caitanyam - Rädhä-Kåñëa in one person; bhakta-vatsalam - lover of
His bhaktas.
Then in a solitary place He offered that sweetened rice mixed with milk and ghee
to the beloved breath of His life, Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, and the Lord reciprocated
affectionately with His devotee.

eva krameëa çréväsa-paëòitädyäù sa-patnikäù
sevä cakrur bhagavato / gauräìgasya yathä-sukham 15
evam - similarly; krameëa - in sequence; çréväsa-paëòita-ädyäù - headed by
Çréväsa Paëita; sa-patnikäù - with their wives; seväm cakruù - rendered service;
bhagavataù - of the Lord; gauräìgasya - of Gauräìga; yathä-sukham - to their
pleasure.
Similarly, in the order of seniority beginning with Çréväsa Paëita, the other bhaktas
together with their wives offered service to Gauräìga to their heart's content.

tataç ca prema-gosvämé / sammantrya sva-janaiù saha
navéna gaura-candrasya / näma-saìkérttana çubham 16
karoti maëòalé-ktya / hareëa vaiëavaiù saha
ntyati paramoddaëòa / garjjati dhävati kvacit 17

[p.668]
tataù - then; ca - and; prema-gosvämé - Advaita _cärya; sammantrya - inviting;
sva-janaiù saha - with His own men; navénam - novel; gaura-candrasya - of
Gaura Candra; näma-saìkértanam; çubham - auspicious; karoti - He made;
maëòalé-ktya - forming a circle; hareëa - with jubilation; vaiëavaiù saha together with the vaiñëavas; ntyati - He dances; parama-uddaëòam - very
intense; garjjati - He roars; dhävati - He runs; kvacit - sometimes.
Then Çré Advaita _cärya, the gosvämé of prema assembled His own men and
created a new form of saìkértana from the names of Gaura Candra. He jubilantly
formed a circle of all the vaiñëavas, and within it He danced very high, sometimes
roaring and sometimes running.

nityänando 'pi bhagavän / gauräìga-bhäva-bhävitaù
yasya ntya-padäghätaiù / kampate bhuvana-trayam 18
nityänandaù - eternally blissful Lord; api - although; bhagavän - the all-opulent
Lord; gauräìga-bhäva-bhävitaù - felt according to the mood of Gauräìga; yasya whose; ntya - dancing; pada-äghätaiù - by the striking of His feet; kampate trembled; bhuvana-trayam - the three worlds.
On that occasion, Çré Nityänanda made the three worlds quake by the striking of
His dancing feet. Although He is Himself the Supreme Lord, still every emotion that
He feels is in harmony with Gauräìga's desire.

mat-präëa-sarvvasva gaura-candra mäm uddhara prabho
nityänanda-priya gaura / gadädhara-rasa-prada 19
mat-präëa-sarvasva - O all-in-all of my life-force; gaura-candra - O Gaura
Candra; mäm - me; uddhara - deliver; prabho - O Prabhu; nityänanda-priya - O
dear one of Nityänanda; gaura - O golden Lord; gadädhara-rasa-prada - O
bestower of rasa to Gadädhara.
The devotees chanted, "O Gaura Candra! O all-in-all of My life force! Kindly
deliver me, Prabhu. O beloved of Nityänanda! O Golden Lord! O bestower of rasa on

[p.669]
Gadädhara!

çréväsädi-priya-präëa / prema-da karuëärëava
eva saìkérttana so 'pi / gauräìgaù kértana-priyaù 20
këa-saìkérttana matvä / jagau prema-vaçaù svayam
sa eva kérttanänando / brahmäëòa pürayan babhau 21
çréväsa - of Çréväsa; ädi - and the other devotees; priya-präëa - O life and soul;
prema-da - bestower of love for Kåñëa; karuëä-arëava - O ocean of mercy; evam thus; saìkértanam - congregational chanting; saù - He; api - also; gauräìgaù - the
golden Lord; kértana-priyaù - who loves kértana; këa-saìkértanam congregational chanting of Kåñëa's names; matvä - thinking; jagau - He sang;
prema-vaçaù - controlled by love; svayam - Himself; saù - He; eva - indeed;
kértana-änandaù - the happiness of kértana; brahmäëòam - the universe; pürayan
- filling; babhau - He shone.
"O life and soul of all the devotees headed by Çréväsa! O bestower of love for
Kåñëa! O ocean of compassion!" Then Çré Gauräìga, who dearly loved kértana,
decided to personally perform Kåñëa-saìkértana. He sang from the depths of His
heart, moved by His great love for Kåñëa. His form shone radiantly with the joy of
kértana, and He filled the entire universe with that joy.

sarvve paçyanti ntyanta / gaura-candra sva-sammukham
yathä madhya-gata këa / bälakä vana-bhojinaù 22
sarve - all; paçyanti - they see; ntyantam - dancing; gaura-candram - the Golden
Moon; sva-sammukham - face to face with Him; yathä - as; madhya-gatam sitting in the center; këam - the all-attractive; bälakäù - boys; vana-bhojinaù eaters of the forest picnic.
Each of the devotees beheld Gaura Candra dancing face to face with himself, just
as each of the cowherd boys of Vraja saw Çré Kåñëa seated in the center of the circle
during their forest picnic.

[p.670]
éçvaro 'pi bhagavatädvaitäcäryyeëa sayutaù
nityänando mahä-tejäù / premonmädena ntyati 23
éçvaraù - the Supreme Lord; api - although; bhagavatä - by the Lord; ädvaitaäcäryeëa - by Advaita _cärya; sayutaù - together with; nitya-änandaù - the
original form of a devotee; mahä-tejäù - very powerful; prema-unmädena - by the
madness of love; ntyati - He dances.
Although Nityänanda is the Supreme Lord and is inconceivably powerful, still in
the company of Advaitäcärya, who is also the Lord, He became maddened by love
for Kåñëa and danced.

matta-päréndra-vikräntaù / kärayann avané-talam
gauräìga-prema-dätä yas / tasya ki citram eva tat 24
matta-päréndra - intoxicated lion; vikräntaù - strong; kärayan - causing to do;
avané-talam - the earth planet; gauräìga-prema - love for Gauräìga; dätä donor; yaù - who; tasya - His; kim - what? citram - astonishing; eva - indeed; tat that.
Çré Advaita appeared very powerful just like an intoxicated lion, and He inundated
the earth with chanting and dancing. He is the magnanimous bestower of Gauräìgaprema. What wonderful deed is impossible for Him to perform?

gadädharo 'pi gauräìga-préti-do ntyati sukham
çréväsädyäù sukha sarvve / nöyanti gaura-cetasaù 25
gadädharaù - the energy of a devotee; api - also; gauräìga - the Golden Lord;
préti-daù - giver of pleasure; ntyati - he dances; sukham - happily; çréväsa; ädyaù headed by; sukham - happily; sarve - all; nöyanti - they dance; gaura-cetasaù their minds fixed on Gaura.

[p.671]
Gadädhara also danced to his heart's content, bringing delight to Gauräìga, and all
the bhaktas headed by Çréväsa danced jubilantly with their minds fixed on the form
of Gaura.

etad antar-gata yasya / gauräìga-guëa-kérttanam
sa eva säké nänye ca / koöiço jïäna-päragäù 26
etat - this; anta-gatam - enter within; yasya - who can; gauräìga-guëakértanam - the chanting of the qualities of Gauräìga; saù - he; eva - indeed; säké directly understand; na - not; anye - others; ca - and; koöiçaù - millions; jïänapäragäù - fully conversant in transcendental knowledge.
Only one who can enter into the chanting of Gauräìga's qualities can actually
comprehend them, and not millions of others who may be fully conversant with
transcendental knowledge.

Thus ends the Nineteenth Sarga entitled "Çrémad Advaita Prabhu Performs
Gauräìga Kértana," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Twentieth Sarga
çré-guëòicä-mandira-viläsaù
The Lord's Pastimes Within Guëòicä Mandira

ekadä pöavän këaù / çré-dämodara-paëòitam
satya kathaya man-mätuù / këa-bhaktir dòhästi kim 1
ekadä - once; pöavän - inquired; këaù -the all-attractive Lord; çré-dämodara-

[p.672]
paëòitam - of the learned scholar; satyam - truly; kathaya - tell; mat-mätuù - of
My mother; këa-bhaktiù - devotion to Kåñëa; dòhä - firm; asti kim - is there?
One day, Gaura Kåñëa inquired from Çré Dämodara Paëita, "Tell Me truly - is My
mother's devotion firmly fixed at the feet of Çré Kåñëa?"

çrutvä sa präha sa-krodhas / tat-prasädät para tvayi
sästi këa-rasä bhaktir / nityänanda-svarüpiëé 2
çrutvä - having heard; saù - he; präha - he said; sa-krodhaù - angrily; tatprasädät - by her mercy; param - supreme; tvayi - on You; sä asti - she is; këarasä - embued with the mellows of Kåñëa; bhaktiù - devotion; nityänandasvarüpiëé - in the form of Nityänanda.
Hearing this, Dämodara angrily replied, "It is by her unbounded mercy upon You
that the goddess of bhakti, whose nature is full of eternal bliss, exists in You."

çrutvä vipra parivajya / präha sa-karuëa prabhuù
yathä tva präha mä bandho / satya tat sarvvam eva hi 3
çrutvä - hearing this; vipram - learned brähmaëa; parivajya - warmly
embracing; präha - He said; sa-karuëam - mercifully; prabhuù; yathä - as; tvam you; präha - He said; mäm - Me; bandho - O friend; satyam - truth; tat - that;
sarvam - all; eva - indeed; hi - indeed.
Hearing this, Mahäprabhu warmly embraced that learned vipra and mercifully said,
"My friend, certainly what you said to Me is all true.

tadäjïayä hi ketre 'smin / vasämi nätra saçayaù
tat-premnä néyate tasyäù / sannidhim apy ala khalu 4
tat-äjïayä - by her order; hi - surely; ketre - in Kñetra; asmin - in this; vasämi I dwell; na - not; atra - here; saçayaù - doubt; tat-premnä - by her love; néyate - I

[p.673]
am drawn; tasyäù - her; sannidhim - presence; api - although; alam - enough!;
khalu - certainly.
"Indeed, it is solely by her order that I reside in Çré Kñetra. Even then, the power of
her love draws Me into her presence."

tataù çré-jagad-éçasya / snäna-yäträ-mahotsavam
dadara parama-prétaù / sa-bhaktaù sägrajo hariù 5
tataù - then; çré-jagat-éçasya - of the Lord of the universe; snäna-yäträ bathing-festival; mahä-utsavam - great celebration; dadara - He saw; paramaprétaù - very lovingly; sa-bhaktaù - with the devotees; sa-agra-jaù - with His firstborn (brother); hariù.
Thereafter, in the company of His devotees and His elder brother, Çré Hari saw
with great happiness the grand celebration of Lord Jagannätha's bathing festival.

tato 'navasara vékya / räma-mädhavayoù prabhuù
sa-bhakto duùkha-santapto / gatvä 'py äläla-näthakam 6
tataù - then; anavasaram - the absence; vékya - after seeing; räma-mädhavayoù of Baladeva and Jagannätha; prabhuù - the Master; sa-bhaktaù - with His
devotees; duùkha-santaptaù - burning with grief; gatvä - having gone; api although; ä-läla-näthakam - to the Lord who cherishes all.
Seeing that Their Lordships Räma and Mädhava were absent during the period
after the bathing ceremony known as anavasara, Mahäprabhu's heart burned with
sorrow, and He left with His bhaktas to see _lälanätha-deva.

paçyan deva sapta-rätri / sthitväyätaù sa sa-tvaram
netrotsava ca sampaçyan / sägrajasya jagat-pateù 7
paçyan - seeing; devam - the Lord; sapta-rätrim - for seven days; sthitvä -

[p.674]
having stayed; äyätaù - came; saù - He; sa-tvaram - with speed; netra-utsavam festival for the eyes; ca - and; sampaçyan - looking upon; sa-agrajasya - with His
elder brother; jagat-pateù - of the Lord of the universe.
He stayed there for seven days, gazing at the Deity of _lälanätha, and then swiftly
returned to look upon the protector of the universe and His elder brother. That sight
was a great festival for His eyes.

saìkérttana-rasänandair / nanartta sva-janaiù saha
bhaktäbhimäné bhagavän / nityänanda-karäçritaù 8
saìkértana - congregational chanting; rasa-änandaiù - by joys of the rasa;
nanarta - He danced; sva-janaiù - with His men; saha - together; bhaktaäbhimäné - the giver of love to His devotees; bhagavän; nityänanda-kara-äçritaù taking shelter of the hand of Nityänanda.
Inspired by the joys of saìkértana-rasa, Gaura Bhagavän, the bestower of love upon
His devotees, danced in their company while holding Nityänanda's hand.

tataù svam älaya gatvä / sva-bhaktaiù savto hariù
bhuktvä mahä-prasäda ca / bhakta-datta sukha babhau 9
tataù - then; svam - own; älayam - abode; gatvä - having gone; sva-bhaktaiù by His devotees; savtaù - surrounded; hariù - the remover of sin; bhuktvä enjoyed; mahä-prasädam - food-remnants sanctified by the Lord; ca - and;
bhakta-dattam - given by the devotee; sukham - happiness; babhau - shone.
Returning to His own room, surrounded by His bhaktas, Çré Hari enjoyed the mahäprasäda brought by a devotee, and thus He shone in happiness.

eva sadänanda-rase 'ti-mattaù / çri-gaura-candro hari-rämayoù
çubham
mahä-vibhütyoù kila syandanotsava / draöu sva-bhaktaiù saha sa-

[p.675]
tvara yayau 10
evam - thus; sadä - always; änanda-rase - in the rasa of joy; ati-mattaù - very
intoxicated; çri-gaura-candraù - the splendid Golden Moon; hari-rämayoù - of
Hari and Räma; çubham - auspicious; mahä-vibhütyoù - who had great opulence;
kila - truly; syandana-utsavam - chariot festival; draöum - to see; sva-bhaktaiù with His devotees; saha - together; sa-tvaram - swiftly; yayau - He went.
Continuously inebrieted by änanda-rasa, Çré Gaura Candra then went swiftly in the
company of His devotees to see the splendid chariot festival of the greatly opulent
Lords, Hari and Räma.

dövä ca räma madhusüdana ca / sudarçanenäpi yutä subhadräm
ratha-sthitau tau ratha-sasthitä tä / savékya hareëa nanäma
sägrajaù 11
dövä - seeing; ca - and; rämam - Balabhadra; madhu-südanam - Jagannätha; ca and; su-darçanena - with Sudarçana, His disc; api - also; yutäm - with;
subhadräm; ratha-sthitau - seated on Their chariots; tau - They two; rathasasthitäm - seated on Her chariot; täm - Her; savékya - seeing; hareëa - with joy;
nanäma - bowed down; sa-agrajaù - with His elder brother.
When He saw the killer of Madhu and Lord Räma seated on Their chariots and also
Subhadrä accompanied by the sudarçana-cakra on Her chariot, Mahäprabhu joyously
bowed down before Them along with His elder brother.

çré-guëòicä-mandiram eva sa-tvara / rathäç ca gacchanti sumerutulyäù
sa-bhakta-vargaù kila gaura-candramä / yayau tad-agre 'khilabhäva-bhävitaù 12
çré-guëòicä-mandiram - temple of Guëicä, name of the wife of Indradyumna,
the first king to worship Jagannätha Svämé; eva - indeed; sa-tvaram - quickly;

[p.676]
rathäù - chariots; ca - and; gacchanti - they are going; su-meru-tulyäù - as high as
Mount Sumeru; sa-bhakta-vargaù - with the group of bhaktas; kila - truly; gauracandramä - the moon of Gaura; yayau - went; tat-agre - in front of Lord
Jagannätha; akhila-bhäva-bhävitaù - absorbed in all ecstatic moods.
As the chariots went speedily to the Guëòicä Mandira, they appeared as high as
Mount Sumeru. The moon of Gaura along with His company of bhaktas went before
Jagannätha Svämé, fully absorbed in all varieties of ecstatic moods.

paçyan jagan-nätha-mukhäravinda / smaran kuru-ketra-viçälavaibhavam
saìkérttanänanda-samudra-magnaiù / sva-bhakta-vargaiù kila
veöito hariù 13
paçyan - beholding; jagat-nätha - of the Lord of the universe; mukhaaravindam - the lotus face; smaran - remembering; kuru-ketra - of the place of
pilgrimage; viçäla-vaibhavam - the vast magnificence; saìkértana congregational chanting; änanda - bliss; samudra-magnaiù - by those merged in
the ocean; sva-bhakta-vargaiù - with His group of bhaktas; kila - truly; veöitaù surrounded; hariù - the dispeller of evil.
Beholding the lotus face of Jagannätha-deva and recalling the vast magnificence of
Kuru-kñetra, Çré Hari together with His assembly of bhaktas were submerged in an
ocean of blissful saìkértana.

çré-rädhikä-prema-bharäti-matto / hasan rudan präha tvam eva
nätha
ägaccha yämi vraja-maëòala vibho / vndävana yatra su-vaçikädhvaniù 14
çré-rädhikä - of worshippers, better than all; prema-bhara - the affliction of
love; ati-mattaù - intoxicated; hasan - laughing; rudan - weeping; präha - He
said; tvam - You; eva - indeed; nätha - O Lord; ägaccha - come; yämi - I am

[p.677]
going; vraja-maëòalam - to the circle of the land of Vraja; vibho - O great one;
vndävanam - the forest of Våndä; yatra - where; su-vaçikä-dhvaniù - the sweet
sound of the bamboo flute.
Highly intoxicated by the affliction of Çré Rädhikä's love for Kåñëa, Gauräìga
sometimes laughed and sometimes wept as He addressed Lord Jagannätha, "He
Nätha! I am going to Vraja Maëòala. Please come with Me there, where the sweet
sound of the bamboo flute is heard in the Våndävana forest-bowers."

iti bruvan narttana-gäna-mädhuré / samudra-magnäti manomataìga-jaù
çré-guëòicä-mandiram äpa sa-tvara / rathena särddha jagadéçvarasya ca 15
iti - thus; bruvan - saying; nartana-gäna - dancing and song; mädhuré sweetness; samudra-magnä - drowned in the ocean; äti - beyond; mana-mataìgajaù - the elephant of His mind; çré-guëòicä-mandiram - the temple of Guëicä;
äpa - reached; sa-tvaram - quickly; rathena - by chariot; särdham - with; jagatéçvarasya - of the Lord of the cosmos; ca - and.
So saying, the elephant of Gauräìga mind utterly drowned within the sea of sweet
dance and song, and He swiftly reached the Guëòicä Mandira together with the Lord
of the universe, who was seated on His chariot.

çré-mandire ratna-mayéu vedéu / svaya prakäçäsu ca saìgatau tau
viveçatü räma-janärddanau sukha / paçyann ati präha tvam ägataù
kim 16
çré-mandire - in the radiant temple; ratna-mayéu - made of gems; vedéu - on
altars; svayam - voluntarily; prakäçäsu - shining; ca - and; saìgatau - come
together; tau - the Two; viveçatuù - entered; räma-janärdanau - Balaräma and
Jagannätha; sukham - happily; paçyan - seeing; ati - above; präha - He said; tvam You; ägataù - come; kim - have?

[p.678]
Räma and Janärdana entered together into the radiant temple and sat on shining
altars of gems. Seeing Them happily situated, Gauräìga felt the mood of Rädhäräëé
and asked Kåñëa, "Have You now come home?"

vndävane ägata eva çré-harir / iti sv-avädéj janatä-svanaiù prabhuù
sarvva vana ramyam anupraviçya ca / svänanda-tëo 'khila-bhävapürëaù 17
vndävane - in Våndävana; ägataù - come; eva - indeed; çré-hariù - the remover
of sin; iti - thus; su-avädét - He said nicely; janatä - the multitude; svanaiù - by
the sounds; prabhuù - the Master; sarvam - all; vanam - forest; ramyam charming; anupraviçya - entering after; ca - and; sva-änanda-tëaù - thirsty for
His own happiness; akhila-bhäva-pürëaù - filled with complete ecstasy.
Using the tumultuous roar of the crowds as His voice, Çré Hari replied in a very
sweet tone, "Yes, I have indeed returned to Våndävana." Then eager to taste the
happiness of their own original rasa, He became replete with all divine ecstacies and
with Çré Rädhä entered the most charming of all the groves of Vndävana.

jagannäthasya sarvva hi / bhogädi-rasa-vaibhavam
paçyan bhakta-janaiù särddha / karoti kérttana mahat 18
jagat-näthasya - of Jagannätha; sarvam - all; hi - certainly; bhoga - enjoyment;
ädi-rasa - the original rasa; vaibhavam - the magnificence; paçyan - seeing;
bhakta-janaiù - with the bhaktas; särdham - in company; karoti - He performs;
kértanam - describing the Lord in name; mahat - great.
Beholding the magnificent arrangements for Jagannätha-deva's enjoyment of this
ädi-rasa, Gaura Hari together with His bhaktas performed a great kértana.

vndäraëya-viläsino mura-ripoù çré-räsa-lélä çubhä
säkäd eva viläsa-läsya-laharé-pürëä manan çré-hariù

[p.679]
çré-rädhä-rasa-mädhuré-dhuri-tanur gauräìga-mürttiù svaya
çré-nandätma-ja eva bhakti-rasikaù sväräjya-lakmé dadhe 19

vndä-araëya - of the forest of Våndä; viläsinaù - of the enjoyer of pleasurepastimes; mura-ripoù - of the enemy of Mura; çré-räsa-léläm - the räsa dance;
çubhäm - sublime; säkät - direct; eva - indeed; viläsa-läsya - pastime dance;
laharé - great wave; pürëäm - full; manan - thinking; çré-hariù - the delightful
thief of the mind; çré-rädhä - the sublime worshipper; rasa-mädhuré - the
sweetness of the rasa; dhuri - peak; tanuù - form; gauräìga - the golden Lord;
mürtiù - form; svayam - spontaneously; çré-nanda-ätmaja - the son of Nanda; eva
- indeed; bhakti - devotional service; rasikaù - connoisseur of rasa; sväräjya monarchy; lakmém - opulence; dadhe - bestowed.
Çré Gaura Hari experienced His own limitless wave of pastime dancing to be none
other than the sublime Vndävana räsa-lélä performed by the enemy of Mura. Surely
Çré Gauräìga is none other than that same son of Nanda come to relish the
superexcellence of Çré Rädhä-rasa, but He has now appeared in the form of a rasikabhakta in order to distribute the wealth of His sovereign realm of Goloka.

Thus ends the Twentieth Sarga entitled "The Lord's Pastimes Within Gundicä
Mandira," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Twenty-first Sarga
räma-däsa-anugrahaù
The Lord Shows Mercy to Rämadäsa

eva dina-traya tatra / bhakteçvara-vibhävitaù
këo viharate ratna-mandira räsa-maëòalam 1

[p.680]
evam - thus; dina-trayam - three days; tatra - there; bhakta-éçvara - the Lord of
the bhaktas; vibhävitaù - felt the moods; këaù - Kåñëa Caitanya; viharate enjoys; ratna-mandiram - the jewel temple; räsa-maëòalam - the räsa circle.
For three days, while Këa Caitanya manifested the external form of bhakta-räja,
king of the devotees, He internally enjoyed the räsa-dance in that jewel temple.

nava-dina-samudäya guëòicä-prema-väsa
gaja-pati-npa-sevye néla-çailädhinäthe

ktavati jagad-éçe sägraje gaura-candro
ratham anugata eva bhakta-vargeëa särddham 2

nava-dina-samudäyam - nine days having passed; guëòicä - of Guëòicä; premaväsam- residing in the residence of love; gaja-pati - possessor of elephants; npasevye - served by the king; néla-çaila - the blue mountain; adhi-näthe - Supreme
Lord; ktavati - done; jagat-éçe - Lord of the cosmos; sa-agraje - with His elder
brother; gaura-candraù - the Golden Moon; ratham - chariot; anugataù followed; eva - indeed; bhakta-vargeëa - with the host of bhaktas; särdham - in
company.
The Lord of Néläcala remained for nine days with His elder brother Balaräma in
Guëicä, the abode of love, receiving the devoted service of Gajapati Pratäpa Rudra
Mahäräja. Then He embarked on His return journey while Gaura Candra followed
the chariots along with the host of His bhaktas.

herä-païcamé-yäträ ca / çré-lakmé-vijayotsavam
ktvä yayau néla-çaila / çré-lélä-puruottamaù 3
herä - the goddess of fortune goes to see Jagannätha; païcamé - the fifth;
yäträm - festival; ca - and; çré-lakmé-vijaya-utsavam - the festival of Lakñmé's
victory; ktvä - having done; yayau - He went; néla-çailam - to the temple like a
blue mountain; çré-lélä-purua-uttamaù - the Supreme Male who performs
transcendental pastimes.

[p.681]
After first observing the festival of Herä-Païcamé-Yäträ, when the goddess of
fortune seeks out Lord Jagannätha, and also Çré-Lakmé-Vijayotsava, the victory
festival of Lakñmé Devé, then Çré Lélä-Puruñottama, the supreme enjoyer of
transcendental pastimes, returned to His home that resembles a blue mountain.

tataù para çré-çacé-nandano hariù / padmävaté-nandana-rämasaìgataù
çré-ratna-sihäsana-madhya-sasthita / rämänuja paçyati vaiëavaiù
saha 4
tataù param - thereafter; çré-çacé-nandanaù - the son of Çacé; hariù - the
dispeller of sin; padmävaté-nandana - the son of Padmävaté; räma - Nityänanda;
saïgataù - in the association; çré-ratna - bejewelled; siha-äsana - lion-throne;
madhya-sasthitam - seated in the midst of; räma-anujam - the younger brother of
Räma; paçyati - He sees; vaiëavaiù saha - together with the vaiñëavas.
Thereafter, Çré Çacé-nandana Hari, accompanied by Çré Nityänanda Räma, the son
of Padmävaté, together with the assembled vaiñëavas, gazed upon the younger
brother of Räma, who was pleasantly seated in the midst of a resplendent,
bejewelled lion-throne.

* pauräëika dhyänam: A meditation on the Lord taken from the Puräëas:

nélädrau çaìkha-madhye çata-dala-kamale ratna-sihäsana-stha
sarvvälaìkära-yukta nava-ghana-rucira sasthita cägrajena

bhadräyä väma-bhäge ratha-caraëa-yuta brahma-rudrädi-vandya
vedänä säram eka sakala-guëa-maya brahma pürëa smarämi 5

néla-adrau - on the blue mountain; çaìkha-madhye - in the midst of a conch;
çata-dala-kamale - on a hundred-petalled lotus; ratna-siha-äsana-stham - seated
on a jewelled lion-throne; sarva-alaìkära-yuktam - embellished by all kinds of
jewels; nava-ghana-ruciram - having the luster of a fresh raincloud; sasthitam situated; ca - and; agrajena - with His elder brother; bhadräyäù - having
Subhadrä; väma-bhäge - on His left side; ratha-caraëa-yutam - with a chariot

[p.682]
wheel; brahma-rudra-ädi - headed by Brahmä and Çiva; vandyam - praised;
vedänäm - of the Vedas; säram - the essence; ekam - one; sakala-guëa-mayam with all auspicious qualities; brahma pürëam - the Absolute Spirit Whole;
smarämi - I remember.
Within the temple resembling a blue mountain, in the land of Puruñottama Kñetra,
which is shaped like a gigantic conchshell, the Lord resides. Amidst a hundredpetalled lotus, He is seated upon a bejewelled lion-throne. His body is the hue of a
new lightning-illuminated thundercloud, and He is adorned with variegated
ornaments. He is seated along with His elder brother, Baladeva, while His sister,
Subhadrä, sits to His left. He is attended by His disc, Sudarçana, and is offered
prayers by all the gods headed by Brahmä and Rudra. The sole and essential
message of all the Vedas is to achieve knowledge of His Person, which is endowed
with all sublime qualities. Thus do I recall the Supreme Absolute Personality of
Godhead, Lord Jagannätha.

eva dhyätvä gataù këo / miçrasya pupa-veöikäm
sukham äsanam äsitvä / bhaktän gauòa-niväsinaù 6
yäpayäm äsa bhagavän / jananyäù sukha-hetave
yä täsau çré-harer bhakti-rüpiëé prema-rüpiëé 7
evam - thus; dhyätvä - having contemplated; gataù - gone; këaù - all-attractive;
miçrasya - of the brähmaëa; pupa-veöikäm - small flower house; sukham comfortably; äsanam - seat; äsitvä - seated; bhaktän - the devotees; gauòaniväsinaù - residents of Gauòa; yäpayäm äsa - sent; bhagavän - all-opulent Lord;
jananyäù - of His mother; sukha-hetave - for the happiness; yä - who; tä - she;
asau - she; çré-hare - of Çré Hari; bhakti-rüpiëé - the form of devotion; premarüpiëé - the form of love.
After meditating in this way, Gaura Kåñëa went to a small house of flowers
constructed by Käçé Miçra. After seating Himself comfortably on an äsana there, He
sent home the bhaktas of Gauòa to bring happiness to His mother, who is the
embodiment of both bhakti and prema for Çré Hari.

[p.683]
nityänanda samäliìgya / dhtvä tasya kara-dvayam
präha sa-gadgada yähi / gauòa-deça tvam éçvaraù 8
nitya-änandam - the ever-blissful Lord; samäliìgya - warmly embracing; dhtvä holding; tasya - His; kara-dvayam - two hands; präha - He said; saù - He;
gadgadam - falteringly; yähi - You should go; gauòa-deçam - to Bengal; tvam You; éçvaraù - the Lord.
Warmly embracing Nityänanda and clasping His hands, the Lord addressed Him
with a faltering voice, "Go now to Gaua-deça.

tava deha vijänéyäd / viçväsa-bharaëa mama
etaj jïätvä yatheccha tva / kartum arhasi hi prabho 9
tava - Your; deham - body; vijänéyät - may understand; viçväsa-bharaëam supporter of faith; mama - my; etat - this; jïätvä - knowing; yathä-iccham - as
desired; tvam - You; kartum - to do; arhasi - You ought; hi - certainly; prabho - O
Master.
"You are the Supreme Lord. I can therefore understand Your body to be the
sustaining pillar of My faith. Knowing this, You may act in whichever way You
desire, My dear Prabhu.

mürkha-néca-jaòändhäkhyä / ye ca pätakino 'pare
tän eva sarvathä sarvvän / kuru premädhikäriëaù 10
mürkha - fools; néca - lowly; jaòa - dullards; andha - blind; äkhyäù - known as;
ye - those; ca - and; pätakinaù - sinners; apare - others; tän - those; eva - indeed;
sarvathä - in every way; sarvän - all; kuru - make; prema-adhikäriëaù - fit for.
"You must make the fools, the lowly, the dullards, the blind, and all other sinful
men qualified in every respect to receive love for Kåñëa."

[p.684]
tam iti prahasan präha / narttako 'ham tava prabho
kariyämi yathäjïä te / yatas tva sütra-dhärakaù 11
tam - Him; iti - thus; prahasan - laughing loudly; präha - He said; nartakaù the puppet; aham - I; tava - Your; prabho - O Master; kariyämi - I shall act; yathääjïä - according to Your order; te - Your; yataù - since; tvam - You; sütradhärakaù - the string-puller.
Laughing loudly, Nityänanda replied, "Prabhu, I am merely Your puppet; I must
fulfill Your order, for You are the puppeteer."

tayor eva kathayatoù / svarüpädi-gaëaiù saha
puré-çré-paramänanda-rämänandädibhis tathä 12
dräviòa-stho dvijaù kaçcid / daridro buddhi-sattamaù
äjagäma dhanärtha ca / jagannätha-didkayä 13
tayoù - of those two; evam - thus; kathayatoù - who were talking; svarüpa-ädi headed by Svarüpa; gaëaiù - with the group; saha - together; puré-çréparamänanda-rämänanda-ädibhiù - and headed by Çré Paramänanda Puré and
Rämänanda Räya; tathä - also; dräviòa-sthaù - a resident of southern Bhärata
(India); dvijaù - a brähmaëa; kaçcit - a certain; daridraù - poor; buddhi-sattamaù of excellent intelligence; äjagäma - he went; dhana-artham - for the purpose of
wealth; ca - and; jagat-nätha - the Lord of the universe; didkayä - desiring to see.
As those two were speaking in the company of Svarüpa Dämodara and his men,
and also Çré Paramänanda Puré, Rämänanda Räya and the others, a certain poor
brähmaëa of pure intelligence named Ramadäsa had arrived in Puré from south
Bhärata. He desired to see Jagannätha-deva in order to acquire wealth.

nivedya sva-prayojana / jagannäthasya sannidhau
sthitaù sapta-dinäny eva / pratyädeça vicintayan 14

[p.685]
nivedya - submitting; sva-prayojanam - his objective; jagat-näthasya - of
Jagannätha; sannidhau - near; sthitaù - standing; sapta-dinäni - seven days; eva indeed; pratyädeçam - rejection; vicintayan - considering.
After submitting his objective before Jagannätha Svämé and waiting for seven days,
he then considered his petition rejected.

apräpya väïchita duùkhät / samudra-téram ägataù
tatraiva hy ägata daiväd / bibhéaëa ca darçayan 15
apräpya - after not getting; väïchitam - desire; duùkhät - out of unhappiness;
samudra-téram - the shore of the ocean; ägataù - came; tatra - there; eva indeed; hi - certainly; ägatam - came; daivät - by Providence; bibhéaëam - the
pious räkñasa, king of Läìka; ca - and; darçayan - showing.
Grief-stricken because of his unfulfilled desire, he went by the shore of the ocean.
At that moment, by the will of Providence, King Bibhéñaëa of the island of Laìkä
came there and showed himself to that brähmaëa.

papraccha ko bhavän kutra / yähi sa tva vadasva bhoù
saptäha çré-jagannätha-darçanärtha gato 'py aham 16
papraccha - he inquired; kaù - who?; bhavän - your honor; kutra - where?; yähi
- you go; saù - he; tvam - you; vadasva - do tell; bhoù - Oh!; sapta-aham - seven
days; çré-jagannätha-darçana-artham - with the purpose of seeing Jagannätha;
gataù - gone; api - indeed; aham - I.
The brähmaëa inquired, "Oh tell me - who are you, good sir? And where are you
going? I have just spent seven days seeing Çré Jagannätha."

bibhéaëo näma mahyam / ity uktvä prayayau sa ca
vipro 'pi tena särddha ca / yayau saubhägya-parvvataù 17

[p.686]
bibhéaëaù näma - name of Bibhéñaëa; mahyam - my; iti - thus; uktvä - having
said; prayayau - he left; saù - he; ca - and; vipraù - learned brähmaëa; api - also;
tena - with him; särdham - together; ca - and; yayau - he went; saubhägyaparvataù - that mountain of good fortune.
"Bibhéñaëa is my name," the pious räkñasa replied. Then he departed, and the
greatly fortunate vipra went along with him.

ägato gaura-candrasya / samépa çré-vibhéaëaù
dövä çré-caraëa-dvandva / tasya daëòa-natir bhuvi 18
ägataù - went; gaura-candrasya - of Gaura Candra; samépam - in the vicinity;
çré-vibhéaëaù - the pious räkñasa; dövä - having seen; çré-caraëa-dvandvam - the
two shining feet; tasya - His; daëòa-natiù - bowing like a stick; bhuvi - on the
earth.
Çré Bibhéñaëa went to the place where Lord Gaura Candra was staying. Upon
seeing the Lord's shining feet, he fell like a stick to the ground.

vipro 'pi sa camatkära / paçyan prema-pariplutaù
däridrya çläghayan duùkha / nanartta jäta-kautukaù 19
vipraù - the learned brähmaëa; api - also; saù - he; camatkäram astonishment; paçyan - seeing; prema-pariplutaù - drenched by tears of love;
däridryam - poverty; çläghayan - praising; duùkham - unhappiness; nanarta - he
danced; jäta-kautukaù - became jubilant.
Beholding that amazing scene, the brähmaëa also bowed down, and he wept until
his body became drenched by tears of love. Then, praising his own miserable
poverty [which had caused him to eventually meet the Lord], his heart became filled
with jubilation and he danced.

bibhéaëa ca bhagavän / väïchä-kalpa-taruù prabhuù

[p.687]
präha brähmaëa-varyyäya / dhana dattvä bhavän khalu 20
pürëayiyati yenäsau / duùkha-rogäd vimucyate
ktäïjali-puöaù so' pi / jagräha çirasi vacaù 21
bibhéaëam - to Bibhéñaëa; ca - and; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; väïchäkalpa-taruù - desire tree; prabhuù - the Master; präha - said; brähmaëa-varyäya to this exalted brähmaëa; dhanam - wealth; datvä - having given; bhavän - your
honor; khalu - truly; pürëayiyati - You will make him complete; yena - by
which; asau - he; duùkha-rogät - from the disease of misery; vimucyate - he is
liberated; kta-aïjali-puöaù - with folded hands; saù - he; api - assuredly; jagräha he took; çirasi - on his head; vacaù - His words.
The all-opulent Lord, who is like a wish-fulfilling tree, said to Bibhéñaëa, "If your
grace gives wealth to this exalted brähmaëa, his desire will then be fulfilled, thus
freeing him from the affliction of misery." With folded hands, Bibhéñaëa accepted
Mahäprabhu's instruction on his head.

çrutvä dvija-varaù präha / mä mä santyaktum arhasi
yathä te vacana-präptis / tathä kuru jagad-guro 22
çrutvä - hearing; dvija-varaù - the elevated brähmaëa; präha - said; mä - not;
mäm - me; santyaktum - to abandon; arhasi - You should; yathä - as; te - your;
vacana-präptiù - speaking these words; tathä - so; kuru - fulfill; jagat-guro - O
guru of the cosmos.
Hearing this, the elevated brähmaëa said, "O guru of the cosmos! Kindly do not
abandon me. Fulfill the boon promised by You.

jagannätha hékeça / sasärärëava-täraka
patita-prema-daù këas / tvam eva mä samuddhara 23
jagannätha - O Lord of the universe; hékä-éça - O master of the senses; sasära-

[p.688]
arëava-täraka - O deliverer from the ocean of material existence; patita-premadaù - the bestower of love of God on the fallen souls; këaù - all-attractive; tvam You; eva - indeed; mäm - me; samuddhara - deliver.
"O Lord of the universe! Master of the senses! O deliverer of conditioned souls
from the ocean of repeated birth and death! You are the bestower of Kåñëa-prema to
the fallen souls. Indeed, You are Kåñëa, the all-attractive person! Kindly deliver me."

ta präha karuëä-sindhur / yähi tva nija-mandiram
bhuktvä bhogän samutsjya / çré-këa-caraëa sadä 24
tam - him; präha - He said; karuëä-sindhuù - the ocean of mercy; yähi - go;
tvam - you; nija-mandiram - to your own home; bhuktvä - having enjoyed;
bhogän - pleasures; samutsjya - renouncing; çré-këa-caraëam - the feet of Çré
Kåñëa; sadä - always.
The ocean of compassion answered him, "Return to your home. Enjoy your
pleasures after first renouncing them at Çré Kåñëa's feet.

bhajanäl labhate bhakti / yathä syät prema-sampadaù
eva çrutvä praëamy asau / yayau nija-gha dvijaù 25
bhajanät - through worship; labhate - one gets; bhaktim - devotion; yathä whereby; syät - there may be; prema-sampadaù - the opulences of prema; evam thus; çrutvä - having heard; praëamya - bowing down; asau - he; yayau - he
went; nija-gham - own home; dvijaù - the twice-born man.
"Through such worship you shall receive bhakti, and by the practice of bhakti the
wealth of Kåñëa-prema can arise in your heart." On hearing this, the brähmaëa
offered Mahäprabhu respectful obeisances and then departed for his home.

bibhéaëaç ca ta stutvä / praëamya ca punaù punaù
jagäma sva-gha ramya / dhyäyan tac-caraëämbujam 26

[p.689]
bibhéaëaù - the pious räkñasa; ca - and; tam - Him; stutvä - glorifying;
praëamya - bowing down; ca - and; punaù punaù - repeatedly; jagäma - went; svagham - own home; ramyam - charming; dhyäyan - contemplating; tat - His;
caraëa-ambujam - lotus feet.
After offering prayers of praise to Gaura Hari and bowing down before Him
repeatedly, Bibhéñaëa also departed for his charming home while meditating on the
Lord's lotus feet.

Thus ends the Twenty-first Sarga entitled "The Lord Shows Mercy to
Rämadäsa," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Twenty-second Sarga
çré-nityänanda-advaita-saìga-mahä-utsavaù
The Joyous Meeting of Nityänanda and Advaita

tataç ca çré-gaura-candro / bhakta-varga-samanvitaù
nityänanda punar api / präha prahasitänanaù 1
tataù - then; ca - and; çré-gaura-candraù - splendid Golden Moon; bhaktavarga-samanvitaù - with His group of bhaktas; nitya-änandam - the ever blissful
Lord; punaù - again; api - also; präha - He said; prahasita-änanaù - brightly
smiling face.
Then accompanied by a group of devotees, Çré Gaura Candra smiled brightly and
again addressed Nityänanda Prabhu:

pürvva yat kathita tac ca / karttavya bhavatä kila

[p.690]
gaccha gauòa hi tat çrutvä / sa jagäma hasan prabhuù 2
pürvam - before; yat - what; kathitam - was spoken; tat - that; ca - and;
kartavyam - should be done; bhavatä - by Your honor; kila - now; gaccha - go;
gauòam - to Bengal; hi - certainly; tat - that; çrutvä - hearing; saù - He; jagäma He went; hasan - smiling; prabhuù - the Master.
"Your Grace! Kindly accomplish all that I formerly instructed You to do. Go now to
Gaua-deça!" Hearing this, Nityänanda Prabhu departed smiling.

pänihäöa puram ramya / raghava-paëòita-gham
praëamanta dvija kroòé-ktvä präha mahä-sukhé 3
pänihäöam puram - the town of Pänihäöa; ramyam - charming; raghava-paëòitagham - house of Räghava Paëita; praëamantam - offering obeisances; dvijam the brähmaëa; kroòé-ktvä - having embraced; präha - He said; mahä-sukhé - the
very happy Person.
When Nityänanda arrived in the charming town of Pänihäöa, He went to the house
of Räghava Paëita. That brähmaëa offered prostrated obeisances before Him, and
Nityänanda very jubilantly embraced him to His heart and said:

räghava kuru çéghra me / su-väsita-jalair api
abhieka candanädi-pupälaìkaraëädinä 4
räghava - O Räghava; kuru - perform; çéghram - quickly; me - my; su-väsitajalaiù - with sweetly scented water; api - also; abhiekam - sacred bath; candana sandalwood pulp; ädi - beginning with; pupa-alaìkaraëa-ädinä - with flowers,
ornaments and so on.
"O Räghava, with great haste perform My sacred bath with sweetly scented water.
Anoint My body with scents such as sandalwood pulp and decorate Me with flowerornaments and so forth.

[p.691]
svarëa-raupya-pravälädi-maëi-muktädi-nirmitaiù
bhüaëaiç ca tvayä käryya / mad-aìga-parimaëòanam 5
svarëa - gold; raupya - silver; praväla - coral; ädi - headed by; maëi-mukta gems and pearls; ädi - and so forth; nirmitaiù - made from; bhüaëaiù ornaments; ca - and; tvayä - by you; käryam - duty; mat-aìga - my body;
parimaëòanam - full decorating.
"You must fully decorate My body with ornaments of gold, silver, coral, gems and
pearls. This is your duty.

yena me präëa-näthasya / gaura-candrasya sarvvadä
sac-cid-änanda-pürëasya / pürëo manoratho bhavet 6
yena - by which; me - my; präëa-näthasya - of the Lord of my life; gauracandrasya - of the Golden Moon; sarvadä - always; sat-cit-änanda-pürëasya filled with eternity, knowledge and bliss; pürëaù - fulfilled; mana-rathaù desire; bhavet - it may be.
"Through this expedient, I shall begin to fulfil the desire of My Lord Gaura Candra
to spread the holy name throughout Bengal! His body is eternal, cognizant and
blissful, and He is the Lord of My life."

çrutvä sarvva çéghram eva / kärayitvä janair dvijaù
su-gandhi-payasä sura-dérghikäyä mudänvitaù 7
snäpayitvä sannimajya / bhüayitvä ca bhüaëaiù
gandha-candana-pupaiç ca / nanäma bhuvi daëòavat 8
çrutvä - hearing; sarvam - all; çéghram - swiftly; eva - indeed; kärayitvä arranged; janaiù - with the people; dvijaù - the brähmaëa; su-gandhi-payasä with very fragrant water; sura-dérghikäyäù - of the celestial Gaìgä; mudä-anvitaù

[p.692]
- filled with joy; snäpayitvä - bathed; sannimajya - immersing; bhüayitvä ornamented; ca - and; bhüaëaiù - with decorations; gandha-candana-pupaiù with scented oils, sandalwood and flowers; ca - and; nanäma - he bowed down;
bhuvi - on the earth; daëòa-vat - like a rod.
Upon hearing all these instructions, the brähmaëa speedily accomplished them
with aid of the people of the town. With much joy he immersed the transcendental
body of Çré Nityänanda in sweetly fragrant water from the river of the gods. After
decorating Him with ornaments and anointing Him with scented oils, candana and
flowers, Räghava Paëita bowed before Him, falling down like a rod to the ground.

sarvvälaìkära-sayukto / reje nanda-suto yathä
baladevaù svaya cäpi / svaya gopäla-rüpa-dhk 9
sarva - all; alaìkära-sayuktaù - with ornaments; reje - He shone; nanda-sutaù the son of Nanda; yathä - as; bala-devaù - the mighty God; svayam - Himself; ca and; api - actually; svayam - spontaneously; gopäla-rüpa-dhk - accepting the
form of a cowherd.
Thus fully adorned, Nityänanda shone like Baladeva, the son of Nanda Himself. By
His own wish He appeared there in His original form as a gopäla.

çrédämädyäù sakhä ye ca / vraja-gopäla-rüpiëaù
vaçé-veëu-viäëädyair / alaìkäraiç ca maëòitäù 10
çré-räma-sundara-gauré-däsädyäù kérttana-priyäù
viharanti sadä nityänanda-saìge mahattamäù 11
çrédämä-ädyäù - headed by Çrédämä; sakhäù - the boyfriends; ye - who; ca and; vraja-gopäla-rüpiëaù - having the forms of cowherds; vaçé-veëu-viäëaädyaiù - by vaçé and veëu flutes, buffalo-horns and so on; alaìkäraiù - with
decorations; ca - and; maëòitäù - ornamented; çré-räma-sundara; gauré-däsa;
ädyäù - headed by; kértana-priyäù - lovers of kértana; viharanti - enjoyed; sadä -

[p.693]
continuously; nityänanda - the original form of a devotee; saìge - in the
association of; mahattamäù - very great souls.
Çré Räma, Sundaränanda, Gaurédäsa and others, who dearly loved to chant the
names of Hari, also accepted the forms of the gopäla-sakhäs of Vraja, headed by
Çrédämä. Decorated by the ornaments of the vaçé and veëu flutes, as well as bugles
made of buffalo-horns and other paraphernalia of cowherd boys, those great souls
took continuous delight in Nityänanda's company.

eva sa bhagavän rämas / taiù särddha jähnavé-jale
kréòan täëòavam äsädya / sva-bhaktänä ghe ghe 12
evam - thus; saù - He; bhagavän - the all-opulent Lord; rämaù - Nityänanda;
taiù - with them; särdham - in company; jähnavé-jale - in the water of the
Jähnavé (Gaìgä); kréòan - sporting; täëòavam - ecstatic dancing; äsädya - taking
to; sva-bhaktänäm - of His devotees; ghe ghe - home to home.
Bhagavän Räma played with His sakhäs in the waters of the Jähnavé. Then dancing
with immense ecstasy, He wandered from home to home to visit all His bhaktas.

ramamäëaù sukhenäpi / gadädhara-gha yayau
gopé-bhävena pürëa sa / dövä ta prema-vihvalaù 13
ramamäëaù - enjoying; sukhena - joyously; api - very; gadädhara - the
personified energy of devotion; gham - to the house; yayau - He went; gopébhävena - with the mood of a gopé; pürëam - filled; saù - he; dövä - seeing; tam Him; prema-vihvalaù - overwhelmed by love.
Thus He enjoyed with great delight. He next visited the home of Gadädhara Däsa.
Just by seeing Gadädhara and appreciating his gopé-bhäva, Nityänanda became
flooded by emotions of prema.

ägataù kérttanänandaù / sapta-grämäkhyaka puram
tri-veëé-téram äsädya / gauräìga-guëa-kérttane 14

[p.694]
ägataù - came; kértana-änandaù - in the bliss of kértana; sapta-grämaäkhyakam puram - the town named Sapta Gräma; tri-veëé-téram - the bank of the
Trivené, the confluence of the Gaìgä, Yamunä and Sarasvaté; äsädya - reaching;
gauräìga-guëa-kértane - in the chanting of the qualities of Gauräìga.
Absorbed in kértana-bliss, they came to the town named Sapta Gräma and went to
the bank of the Trivené while singing songs of Gauräìga's qualities.

nanartta paramänanda / gopé-bhäva pradarçayan
nityänando 'pi gauräìga-kérttanänanda-däyakaù 15
ktvä tasmin maholläsa / purandara-gha yayau
tasya prema-rasenäpi / ktvä tasya sukha ca saù 16
nanarta - He danced; parama-änandam - transcendental joy; gopé-bhävam moods of the gopés; pradarçayan - showing; nityänandaù - the original form of a
devotee; api - also; gauräìga-kértana-änanda - of the joy of Gauräìga-kértana;
däyakaù - bestower; ktvä - having done; tasmin - in that; mahä-ulläsam - great
splendor and joy; purandara-gham - the home of Purandara; yayau - He went;
tasya - His; prema-rasena - by His loving mellows; api - also; ktvä - made; tasya his; sukham - happiness; ca - and; saù - He.
Gadädhara Däsa danced, displaying the supreme ecstasy of the gopés. Then Çré
Nityänanda, bestower of the bliss of Gauräìga-kértana, having created great delight
in that place, went to the house of Purandara. There He satisfied that person's heart
by His mellows of prema.

yatra saptarayaù sarvve / smaranti bhävataù padam
mukta-veëé-tayäkhyäta / vadanti veda-päragäù 17
yatra - where; sapta-ayaù - the seven sages; sarve - all; smaranti - remember;
bhävataù - of ecstasy; padam - the feet (of Näräyaëa); mukta-veëé-tayä - by the

[p.695]
releasing of the rivers; äkhyätam - known; vadanti - they say; veda-päragäù persons learned in the Vedas.
Persons conversant in the Vedas have named that place where the currents mingle
Mukta-veëé. There all the seven sages contemplate the transcendental abode of all
ecstasy, which is the lotus feet of Näräyaëa.

gaìgä-yamunayoç caiva / sarasvatyäç ca sarvvadä
pravähäç ca vadanti sma / tad-darçana-mahotsaväù 18
gaìgä-yamunayoù - of the Gaìgä and Yamunä; ca - and; eva - indeed;
sarasvatyäù - of the Sarasvaté; ca - and; sarvadä - always; pravähäù - currents; ca and; vadanti - they say; sma - indeed; tat - that; darçana - sight; mahä-utsaväù they felt greatly festive.
Sages say that the currents of the Gaìgä, Yamunä and Sarasvaté eternally flow
there, and the sight of that spot causes great jubilation to the pilgrims.

narä muktä bhavanti hi / snätvä vä smaraëäd api
harau bhakti ca vindanti / sarvva-duùkha-vinäçiném 19
naräù - men; muktäù - liberated; bhavanti - become; hi - certainly; snätvä bathing; vä - or; smaraëät - by remembering; api - even; harau - to Hari; ca and; bhaktim - devotion; ca - and; vindanti - achieve; sarva-duùkha-vinäçiném destroying all grief.
Simply by bathing there or even remembering that place, men attain liberation,
achieve devotion to Çré Hari, and nullify all distress.

nityänanda-prabhus tatra / vaëijän tu ghe ghe
karoti këa-caitanya-näma-saìkérttana mahat 20
nityänanda-prabhuù - the Lord who displays unending bliss; tatra - there;

[p.696]
vaëijän - amongst the merchants; tu - indeed; ghe ghe - home to home; karoti did; këa-caitanya-näma-saìkértanam - the chanting of Kåñëa Caitanya's names;
mahat - great.
Wandering from house to house amongst the merchants of that town, Nityänanda
Prabhu performed a great saìkértana of the names of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya.

yathä saìkérttana-sukha / navadvépe bhavet purä
nityänanda-prasädena / tad evätra sukha param 21
yathä - as; saìkértana - congregational chanting; sukham - the happiness of;
navadvépe - in Navadvépa; bhavet - could take place; purä - before; nityänanda who is ever-blissful; prasädena - by the mercy of; tat - that; eva - indeed; ca and; atra - in this place; sukham - happiness; param - supreme.
Just as the joy of saìkértana was previously displayed in Navadvépa, that joy was
also supremely victorious at Tri-veëé by the mercy of Nityänanda.

uddhäraëa-ghe sthitvä / tena särddha jagad-guruù
gaura-candra-rase magnaù / çänti-puram agät tataù 22
uddhäraëa-ghe - in the house of Uddharana Daööa; sthitvä - staying; tena - with
him; särdham - together; jagat-guruù - spiritual master of all sentient beings;
gaura-candra - the Golden Moon; rase - in the mellow of; magnaù - immersed;
çänti-puram - the town of peace; agät - He went; tataù - then.
After staying in the house of Uddhäraëa Datta, that spiritual master of all living
beings departed for Çäntipura, immersed in Gaura Candra-rasa.

nityänanda-mukha dövä / çrélädvaito mahä-matiù
huhuìkäreëa nädena / diì-mukha paripürayan 23
nityänanda - ever-blissful; mukham - the face of; dövä - seeing; çréla-advaitaù -

[p.697]
the avatära of a devotee; mahä-matiù - very wise; huhuìkäreëa - with a roar;
nädena - with a sound; dik-mukham - all directions; paripürayan - filling.
When the very wise Advaita saw the face of Nityänanda, He filled all directions
with a resounding roar of joy.

stutvä parama-hareëa / namasktya punaù punaù
tam äliìgya prabhuç cäpi / praëamya sa-sukha vasan 24
stutvä - after glorifying; parama-hareëa - with transcendental joy; namasktya after bowing down; punaù punaù - repeatedly; tam - Him; äliìgya - embracing;
prabhuù - the Lord; ca - and; api - also; praëamya - bowing down; sa-sukham comfortably; vasan - sat down.
The _cärya glorified Nityänanda with immense bliss, rising and falling before Him
again and again. Çré Nityänanda Prabhu embraced Çré Advaita and also offered
humble obeisances. Then Nityänanda became comfortably seated.

tasyäpi janayan hara / navadvépam agät prabhuù
gauräìga-guëa-sammatto / jagad-ähläda-kärakaù 25
tasya - His; api - also; janayan - generating; haram - jubilation; navadvépam;
agät - He went; prabhuù - the Master; gauräìga-guëa-sammattaù - delighted by
the qualities of Gauräìga; jagat - for all the people of the cosmos; ählädakärakaù - the creator of the joy.
After arousing jubilation in Çré Advaita, Nityänanda, who engladdens the hearts of
all the people of the world, departed for Navadvépa as He was completely
intoxicated by the divine attributes of Çré Gauräìga.

Thus ends the Twenty-second Sarga entitled "The Joyous Meeting of
Nityänanda and Advaita," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita.

[p.698]
* * *
Twenty-third Sarga
nityänanda-viläsaù
The Pastimes of Nityänanda

tata ägatya prathama / çré-çacé-darçanotsukaù
praëamya caraëopänte / mätar ägato 'ha sukham 1
tata - then; ägatya - coming; prathamam - first; çré-çacé-darçana-utsukaù - eager
to see Çré Çacé; praëamya - bowing down; caraëa-upänte - close to her feet;
mätaù - O Mother; ägataù - come; aham - I; sukham - happily.
When Nityänanda Prabhu arrived in Navadvépa, He at first felt an intense
eagerness to see Çacé Mätä. Entering her home, He bowed down close to her feet,
saying, "O Mother, I am very pleased to come and see you!"

çrutvä sä sa-tvara mätä / tasya mürddhni kara-dvayam
dhtvä täteti sambodhya / saïcumbya ca muhur mmuhuù 2
çrutvä - having heard; sä - she; sa-tvaram - swiftly; mätä - mother; tasya - His;
mürdhni - on the head; kara-dvayam - two hands; dhtvä - held; täta - O dear
child; iti - thus; sambodhya - addressing; saïcumbya - kissing all over; ca - and;
muhu muhuù - again and again.
Hearing these words, she quickly took His head in her hands and kissed it again
and again, addressing Him, "My dear child!"

uväca madhura täta / sthätum arhasi mad-ghe
yena tvä sarvvadä täta / paçyämi duùkha-cchedakam 3

[p.699]
uväca - she said; madhuram - sweetly; täta - O dear child; sthätum - to stay;
arhasi - You ought; mat-ghe - in my house; yena - whereby; tväm - You; sarvadä always; täta - dear child; paçyämi - I see; duùkha-cchedakam - remover of
sorrow.
She said sweetly, "Dear child, please stay in my house, for thus I can always look
at You and become free from sorrow."

prahasan präha tä mätaù / çëu satya vadämi te
vasämi sänujo 'ha te / sadä sannihito 'pi ca 4
prahasan - laughing loudly; präha - He said; täm - to her; mätaù - O Mother;
çëu - please listen; satyam - truth; vadämi - I speak; te - your; vasämi - I dwell; saanujaù - with my younger brother; aham - I; te - your; sadä - always; sannihitaù near; api - even; ca - and.
Laughing loudly, Nityänanda replied to her, "Hear Me, Mother, I tell you truly:
Along with My younger brother, I forever live by your side.

tvayä päcitam anna yat / çré-këädhara-püritam
tal-lobhena sadä mätas / tiöhämi tava sannidhau 5
tvayä - by you; päcitam - cooked; annam - food; yat - which; çré-këa-adhara lips of Çré Kåñëa; püritam - covered; tat-lobhena - by desire for that; sadä always; mätaù - O Mother; tiöhämi - I stay; tava - your; sannidhau - in the
presence.
"Since Çré Kåñëa's lips thoroughly savor the food you cook, I always stay in your
presence out of greed for tasting it."

eva çrutvä hasanté sä / pakva-çäly-annam uttamam
süpa ta payasädya ca / tam anna paramädbhutam 6

[p.700]
tasmai sarvva vinivedya / paçyanté mukha-paìkajam
bubhuje sänuja so 'pi / prahasan bhakta-vatsalaù 7
evam - thus; çrutvä - hearing; hasanté - smiling; sä - she; pakva - cooked; çälianna - rice; uttamam - excellent; süpam - dahl soup; tam - that; payasa - sweet
rice; ädyam - headed by; ca - and; tam - that; annam - food; parama-adbhutam very wonderful; tasmai - to Him; sarvam - all; vinivedya - offering; paçyanté seeing; mukha-paìkajam - lotus faces; bubhuje - He enjoyed; sa-anujaù - with His
younger brother; saù api - He was indeed there; prahasan - laughing; bhaktavatsalaù - the lover of His devotees.
Hearing this, Çacé Devé laughed and offered to Him all the foods which she had
prepared. There was very fine cooked rice, soup made of dahl and vegetables, plus
various sweets such as sweet rice. All of these foods had a very wonderful flavor.
While the lover of His devotees, Çré Nityänanda, ate laughing in the company of His
younger brother (who was indeed present), Çacé Mätä gazed upon Their lotus faces.

dövä sä räma-këau ca / bhuktavantau sukhärëave
magnä babhüva tä dövä / nityänanda-dayä-nidhiù 8
präha mätaù satyam eva / vacaù ki me vadädhunä
sä präha täta te satyam / éçvarasya vaco yathä 9
dövä - seeing; sä - she; räma-këau - the divine duo; ca - and; bhuktavantau eating; sukha-arëave - in the ocean of joy; magnä - merged; babhüva - she
became; täm - her; dövä - seeing; nityänanda - personified eternal bliss; dayänidhiù - ocean of mercy; präha - He said; mätaù - O Mother; satyam - true; eva indeed; vacaù - words; kim - whether?; me - to Me; vada - do tell; adhunä - now;
sä - she; präha - said; täta - dear one; te - Your; satyam - true; éçvarasya - of the
Lord; vacaù - words; yathä - like.
Seeing Räma and Kåñëa eating, she became merged in a sea of joy. Nityänanda, the

[p.701]
ocean of mercy, glanced at her and said, "Mother, tell Me now. Were My words
true?" She replied, "Dear child, Your words are as true as the words of I~çvara.

tathäpi sänuja tvä hi / draöum icchämi sarvvadä
yathäjïä te sukha mätaù / karttavya me nirantaram 10
tathä api - still; sa-anujam - with Your younger brother; tväm - You; hi certainly; draöum - to see; icchämi - I desire; sarvadä - always; yathä-äjïä - by
your order; te - your; sukham - happily; mätaù - O Mother; kartavyam - should
be done; me - of me; nirantaram - perpetual.
"Still I wish that I could always see You and Your younger brother." Nityänanda
replied, "Dear Mother, whatever you may order Me, it is always My duty to fulfill it
with gladness."

eva tatra sthito nityänandaù sarvva-sukha-pradaù
janayan paramänanda / navadvépa-niväsinäm 11
evam - thus; tatra - there; sthitaù - staying; nityänandaù - perpetual joy
personified; sarva-sukha-pradaù - bestower of all happiness; janayan generating; parama-änandam - transcendental bliss; navadvépa-niväsinäm - for
the residents of Navadvépa.
Thus Nityänanda, the bestower of all bliss, stayed in the house of Çacé and created
transcendental happiness for the residents of Navadvépa.

kurvvan sarva-janän këa-caitanya-rasa-bhävitän
gauräìga-kérttanänando / nanartta sva-janaiù saha 12
kurvan - doing; sarva-janän - all people; këa-caitanya - teacher of service to
the name; rasa-bhävitän - inspired by the rasa; gauräìga-kértana-änandaù - filled
with joy of Gauräìga-kértana; nanarta - He danced; sva-janaiù - with His own
men; saha - in company.

[p.702]
He inspired all men to taste the rasa of munificence and service to the name, as
taught by Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu, and as He danced with His associates, His
heart was filled with the joy of Gauräìga-kértana.

gandha-candana-liptäìgo / nélämbara-samävtaù
svarëa-raupya-pravälädyair / alaìkäraiç ca maëòitaù 13
gandha - scents; candana - sandalwood paste; lipta - anointed; aìgaù - body;
néla-ambara - blue garment; samävtaù - covered by; svarëa-raupya-praväla gold, silver, coral; ädyaiù - and so on; alaìkäraiù - by ornaments; ca - and;
maëòitaù - decorated.
His body was anointed by fragrant scents and sandalwood paste, and He was
dressed in a garment of deep blue color. He was decorated by ornaments of gold,
silver, coral and other precious substances.

karpüra-tämbulädyaiç ca / pürëa-çré-mukha-paìkajaù
loha-daëòa-dharo rüpya-hära-kaustubha-bhüaëaù 14
karpüra - camphor; tämbula - betel-nut and chewing spices; ädyaiù - headed
by; ca - and; pürëa - full; çré-mukha - lustrous mouth; paìka-jaù - mud-born
(lotus); loha-daëòa-dharaù - holder of a copper staff; rüpya - of silver; hära necklace; kaustubha-bhüaëaù - enhanced by the Kaustubha gem.
His fully blossomed lotus-like mouth was fragrant with camphor and betel. He held
a copper staff, and He was further ornamented by a silver necklace holding the
Kaustubha gem.

kuëòalaika-dharaù çrémän / vana-mälä-vibhüitaù
veëu-päëiù sadä kurvvan / gauräìga-guëa-kérttanam 15
kuëòala-eka-dharaù - wearer of one earring; çrémän - illustrious; vana-mälävibhüitaù - ornamented by a forest flower-garland; veëu-päëiù - a flute in the

[p.703]
hand; sadä - always; kurvan - doing; gauräìga-guëa-kértanam - the chanting of
Gauräìga's qualities.
That illustrious Lord wore a single earring, and He was decorated by a garland of
forest-flowers. He held a flute in His hands, and He sang incessantly of Çré
Gauräìga's qualities.

caura-dasyu-gaëäù sarvve / dövä tasya vibhüaëam
harttu kurvvanti te nänä / sva-yatnam ätatäyinaù 16
caura - thieves; dasyu - brigands; gaëäù - gangs; sarve - all; dövä - seeing; tasya His; vibhüaëam - ornaments; hartum - to take; kurvanti - made; te - they; nänä many; sva-yatnam - personal attempts; ätatäyinaù - armed men.
Seeing His fine ornaments, all the bands of thieves and dacoits made many
attempts to steal them.

tän eva kpayä pürëo / nityänando mahä-prabhuù
gauräìga-kérttanänanda-paripürëän cakära ha 17
tän - they; eva - indeed; kpayä - out of mercy; pürëaù - full; nityänandaù - the
Lord of eternal bliss; mahä-prabhuù - the great Master; gauräìga-kértana; änandaparipürëän - totally absorbed in the joy; cakära - made; ha - indeed.
Feeling great compassion for them, Nityänanda Mahäprabhu transformed them
from murderous dacoits into men wholly absorbed in relishing the nectarean bliss of
Gauräìga-kértana.

eva sa viharaë këa-caitanya-rasa-bhävukaù
karoti vividhä kréòä / gopäla-bäla-lélayä 18
evam - thus; saù - He; viharaë - enjoyed; këa-caitanya-rasa - the mellows of
Kåñëa Caitanya; bhävukaù - one who madly experiences ecstasy; karoti - does;

[p.704]
vividhäm - various; kréòäm - sports; gopäla-bäla - cowherd boy; lélayä - by the
pastime.
Thus Nityänanda took His pleasure as a Gaura-bhävuka, one who madly
experiences the ecstatic emotions and transcendental moods taught by Kåñëa
Caitanya, and He performed many kinds of sportive pastimes as a cowherd boy.

gaìgä-téra samäsädya / sva-bhaktänä ghe prabhuù
viharan sneha-sampürëaù / këa-däsa-gha yayau 19
baòa-gäché-niväsé sa / präpya dupräpyam éçvaram
änandenäkulo bhütvä / dhunvan väso nanartta ha 20
gaìgä-téram - the bank of the Gaìgä; samäsädya - coming to; sva-bhaktänäm of His own bhaktas; ghe - in the houses; prabhuù - the Master; viharan enjoying; sneha-sampürëaù - completely filled by affection; këa-däsa-gham - the
house of Kåñëa Däsa; yayau - He went; baòa-gäché-niväsé - a resident of Baagaché town (meaning "big tree"); saù - he; präpya - attaining; dupräpyam - the
unattainable; éçvaram - Supreme Lord; änandena - out of bliss; äkulo - filled;
bhütvä - becoming; dhunvan - waving; väsaù - garment; nanarta - he danced; ha indeed.
Overflowing with affection for all, Nityänanda Prabhu travelled along the bank of
the Gaìgä, visiting the homes of His bhaktas and tasting bliss. Once, He visited the
home of Kåñëa Däsa, who was a resident of Baa-gäché. Having attained the
unattainable Supreme Personality of Godhead as a guest within His home, Kåñëa
Däsa became filled with joy and danced while waving his upper garment.

mahä-puëyatamo grämo / baòa-gächéti saìjïakaù
nityänanda-svarüpasya / vihäro bhävi yatra vai 21
mahä-puëyatamaù - most pious; grämaù - town; baòa-gäché - big tree; iti - thus;
saìjïakaù - known; nityänanda-svarüpasya - of the original form of Nitäi;

[p.705]
vihäraù - pleasure-pastimes; bh_vi - took place; yatra - where; vai - truly.
That town known as Baa-gäché is most pious, for in that place Nityänanda-svarüpa
enjoyed many pleasure-pastimes.

këa-däsena särddha çré-navadvépa samägataù
viharan kérttanänando / räma-däsädibhir vtaù 22
këa-däsena - with Kåñëa Däsa; särdham - in company; çré-navadvépam - the
town of nine islands; samägataù - approached; viharan - enjoying; kértanaänandaù - delighted by kértana; räma-däsa-ädibhiù - by those headed by Räma
Däsa; vtaù - surrounded.
Then, surrounded by His devotees headed by Kåñëa Däsa and Räma Däsa, and
revelling in the bliss of kértana, Nityänanda approached Çré Navadvépa.

çré-këa-caitanya-nämnä / paripürëa jagat-trayam
ktvä raräja gopälaiù / sama nanda-vraje yathä 23
çré-këa-caitanya-nämnä - by the names of Kåñëa Caitanya; paripürëam - entire;
jagat-trayam - the three worlds; ktvä - made; raräja - He shone; gopälaiù - with
the cowherds; samam - in company; nanda-vraje - in the land of Vraja ruled by
Nanda; yathä - as.
In company with those gopälas, Nityänanda made the three worlds fully satisfied
through the chanting of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya's names, just as it had formerly been in
the land of Vraja when Nanda ruled as king of the cowherds.

vetra-vaçé-çìga-veëu-guïja-mälä-vibhüitaiù
päradair ävtaù këa-kérttanämta-varakaiù 24
baladevaù svaya gopo / vndäraëya-viläsavän
tad-rüpa darçayan loke / gauräìga-präëa-vallabhaù 25

[p.706]
vetra - staff; vaçé - long flute; çìga - bugle; veëu - small flute; guïja-mälä strings of red berries; vibhüitaiù - with ornaments; päradaiù - with His
associates; ävtaù - surrounded; këa-kértana-amta-varakaiù - by those who
caused the rains of nectarean Kåñëa kértana; baladevaù - Kåñëa's big brother;
svayam - spontaneously; go-paù - the cowherd; vndäraëya - in the forest of
Våndä; viläsavän - performer of pastimes; tat-rüpa - His form; darçayan showing; loke - to the world; gauräìga - the golden Lord; präëa - life force;
vallabhaù - the beloved.
Nityänanda's love for Çré Gauräìga was the very energy which sustained His life.
He was surrounded by associates who inundated the world with the nectarean rains
of Kåñëa-kértana. They were decorated by staffs for herding cows, various kinds of
flutes, buffalo horn bugles, and strands of red guïjä berries. In their company He
who is none other than the original Baladeva, and who formerly played the pastimes
of a cowherd in Våndävana, displayed that same form to the world.

Thus ends the Twenty-third Sarga entitled "The Pastimes of Nityänanda," in
the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

* * *
Twenty-fourth Sarga
bhakta-maëala-viläsaù
Gaura's Pastimes Among the Circle of His Devotees

tataù çré-gauräìga-candraù / svarüpädyaiù samanvitaù
çré-rädhä-bhäva-mädhuryyaiù / pürëo na veda kiïcana 1
tataù - then; çré-gauräìga-candraù - the golden moon-like Lord; svarüpaädyaiù - with the devotees headed by Svarüpa Dämodara; samanvitaù - in

[p.707]
company; çré-rädhä-bhäva-mädhuryaiù - with the sweetnesses of Çré Rädhä's
ecstasy; pürëaù - full; na - not; veda - knew; kiïcana - anything else.
Meanwhile, Çré Gauräìga Candra was in Jagannätha Puri, accompanied by intimate
devotees headed by Svarüpa Dämodara, and He became fully absorbed in the
sweetnesses of the ecstatic moods felt by Çrématé Rädhäräëé, and He knew nothing
else.

rämänandena sahitaù / këa-mädhuryya-vaibhavam
äsvädyäsvädayad bhaktän / bhakta-vaçyaù svaya hariù 2
rämänandena - with Rämänanda; sahitaù - together; këa-mädhurya-vaibhavam the glory of Kåñëa's sweetness; äsvädya - having relished; äsvädayat - He caused
to relish; bhaktän - the devotees; bhakta-vaçyaù - controlled by His devotees;
svayam - voluntarily; hariù - the thief of the mind.
By His own wish, Çré Hari accepts the control of His devotees' pure love. Thus,
through the assistance of Rämänanda Räya, He tasted the glories of Kåñëa's
sweetness and then induced His other devotees to also taste it.

vndävana-smärakäëi / vanäny upavanäni ca
çré-këänveaëa tatra / yamunä-smärakena ca 3
samudra-patana cäpi / svarüpädyair nidarçitam
këa-païca-guëenaiva / païcendriya-vikaraëam 4
vndävana-smärakäëi - reminding of Våndävana; vanäni - forests; upa-vanäni groves; ca - and; çré-këa-anveaëam - searching for Kåñëa; tatra - there; yamunäsmärakena - by remembrance of Yamunä; ca - and; samudra-patanam - falling in
the ocean; ca - and; api - also; svarüpa-ädyaiù - headed by Svarüpa Dämodara;
nidarçitam - seen; këa - the son of Nanda Mahäräja; païca-guëena - by the five
qualities of; eva - indeed; païca-indriya - five senses; vikaraëam - attracting.

[p.708]
He was constantly engaged in remembrance of Våndävana. of There He would
search for Çré Kåñëa in the divine groves and bowers. Once, thinking the ocean to be
the Yamunä, He fell into the ocean and was later found by His bhaktas led by
Svarüpa Dämodara. At all times, His five senses - eyes, ears, tongue, nose, and skin were forcibly attracted to the five features of Kåñëa, namely His transcendental
form, sound, taste, smell, and touch.

surabhé-madhya-pätena / kürmäkäreëa bhävanam
çré-räsa-lélä-smaraëät / pralapädy-anuvarëanam 5
surabhé-madhya - in the midst of cows; pätena - by falling; kürma-äkäreëa - by
the form of a tortoise; bhävanam - trance; çré-räsa-lélä-smaraëät - on account of
remembering the räsa dance; pralapa - conversing; ädi - and so on;
anuvarëanam - description.
Once, in a devotional trance He fell down amidst a herd of cows, and His body
took on the shape of a tortoise. After returning to external consciousness, He
chattered incessantly and described the räsa dance pastimes while absorbed in deep
remembrance of that experience.

govardhana-bhrameëaiva / caöaka-giri-darçanam
këädharämtäsväda / gopé-bhävena sarvvataù 6
govardhana-bhrameëa - mistaking for Govardhana; eva - indeed; caöaka-giri sand dune; darçanam - seeing; këa-adhara - the lips of Kåñëa; amta-asvädam relishing the nectar; gopé-bhävena - with the ecstasy of the gopés; sarvataù everywhere.
Seeing the Caöaka sand dune, He mistook it for Govardhana Hill. Wherever He
was, being absorbed in the ecstatic mood of the gopés, He would relish the nectar of
Kåñëa's lips.

madhurä-smti-mätreëa / divyonmäda-viceöitam
jäta svaya bhagavato / bhakti-prema-rasätmanaù 7

[p.709]
madhurä-smti - sweet remembrance; mätreëa - simply; divya-unmäda - divine
madness; viceöitam - behavior; jätam - appeared; svayam - involuntarily;
bhagavataù - of the Lord; bhakti-prema - devotional love; rasa - mellows;
ätmanaù - whose personality.
Simply by such sweet remembrance, the symptoms of divine madness
automatically appeared in the body of Bhagavän Caitanya, who is the very
personification of the mellows of prema-bhakti-rasa.

sättvikädyair aöäbhiç ca / bhävaiù sampürëa-vigrahaù
rämänanda-svarüpäbhyä / sevito räsa-saìjïayä 8
sättvika-ädyaiù - headed by sattvika; aöäbhiù - by eight; ca - and; bhävaiù - by
the ecstacies; sampürëa-vigrahaù - complete form; rämänanda-svarüpäbhyäm with Rämänanda and Svarüpa Dämodara; sevitaù - served; räsa-saìjïayä - with
full knowledge of rasa.
Çré Gauräìga's entire body was thus always pervaded by the eight sättvika-bhävas,
the physical manifestations of transcendental ecstasy. He was rendered service by
Rämänanda and Svarüpa, who were well conversant with the science of rasa.

bhävänurüpa-çlokena / räsa-saìkérttanädinä
çré-rädhä-këayor lélä-rasa-vidyä-nidarçanam 9
bhäva-anurüpa - in accordance with His particular mood; çlokena - by the
verses; räsa-saìkértana-ädinä - headed by chanting about the räsa pastimes; çrérädhä-këayoù - of Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa; lélä-rasa-vidyä - knowledge of the various
pastime rasas; nidarçanam - proclaiming.
In accordance with the Lord's ecstatic moods, they sang verses describing Çré Çré
Rädhä-Kåñëa's räsa-lélä. Thus, the science of pleasure-pastimes was proclaimed.

çré-rädhä-çuddha-premnä hi / çravaëämtam adbhutam

[p.710]
pétvä nirantara çrémac-caitanya-rasa-vigrahaù 10
çré-rädhä-çuddha-premnä - by the pure love of Çré Rädhä; hi - certainly; çravaëaamtam - nectar for the ear; adbhutam - wonderful; pétvä - having drunk;
nirantaram - incessantly; çrémat-caitanya - the personality of the living force;
vigrahaù - the form of rasa.
Because of His spotless love for Kåñëa in the mood of Çré Rädhä, Çré Caitanya, the
original form of transcendental rasa, incessantly drank from that wonderful fountain
of ambrosia for the ears.

sac-cid-änanda-sändrätmä / rädhä-känto 'pi sarvvadä
tad-bhäva-bhävitänanda-rasa-magno babhüva ha 11
sat-cit-änanda - eternity, knowledge and bliss; sändra - concentrated; ätmä person; rädhä-käntaù - the lover of Rädhä; api - also; sarvadä - always; tat Kåñëa; bhäva-bhävita - feeling the feelings of; änanda-rasa - in the mellows of
bliss; magnaù - absorbed; babhüva - He was; ha - indeed.
The Lord's person is formed of condensed eternity, cognizance and bliss, and He is
at all times the lover of Rädhä. Thus, while cherishing the moods felt by Her, the
son of Çaci became drowned in the liquid mellows of bliss.

yä yä lélä prakurvvati / këaù sarvveçvareçvaraù
tä tä ko vaktu çaknoti / tat-kpä-bhäjana vinä 12
yäm yäm - whatever; léläm - pastimes; prakurvati - performs; këaù - Kåñëa
Caitanya; sarva-éçvara-éçvaraù - the controller of all controllers; täm täm - that
very thing; kaù - who?; vaktum - to say; çaknoti - is able; tat-kpä - of His mercy;
bhäjanam - recipient; vinä - without.
Without being a recipient of His mercy, could anyone possibly describe the
pastimes performed by Çré Kåñëa, the supreme controller of all controllers?

[p.711]
rämänandaù svarüpaç ca / paramänanda-nämakaù
käçéçvaro väsudevo / govindädyaiç ca sarvvadä 13
aparaiç ca rasäbhijïaiù / këa-saìkértanätmakaiù
sevyamänaù sa ca këo / bhakta-bhäva-vibhävitaù 14
rämänandaù; svarüpaù; ca - and; paramänanda; nämakaù - the person named;
käçéçvaraù; väsudevaù; govinda; ädyaiù - headed by; ca - and; sarvadä - always;
aparaiù - by the others; ca - and; rasa-abhijïaiù - by those learned in rasa; këasaìkértana - the congregational chanting of Kåñëa's names; ätmakaiù - whose
nature was embued with; sevyamänaù - served; saù - He; ca - and; këaù Caitanya; bhäva - ecstatic moods; bhakta - of a devotee; bhäva - ecstasy;
vibhävita - made to awaken.
While absorbed in the mood of a devotee, Kåñëa Caitanya was rendered service by
devotees who were highly learned in the science of rasa and immersed in Kåñëasaìkértana, such as Çré Rämänanda Räya, Svarüpa Dämodara, Paramänanda Puré,
Käçéçvara Paëita, Väsudeva Datta, and still others headed by Govinda, his
doorkeeper.

çré-navadvépam äsädya / çré-nityänanda éçvaraù
çré-caitanya-rasonmattas / tan-näma-guëa-kérttanaiù 15
çré-navadvépam - at Çré Navadvépa; äsädya - arriving; çré-nitya-änandaù - the
original form of a devotee; éçvaraù - the Supreme Lord; çré-caitanya-rasaunmattaù - enmaddened by the rasa of Çré Caitanya; tat - Him; näma-guëakértanaiù - through the chanting of the names and qualities.
After Çré Nityänanda I~çvara arrived in Navadvépa, He became intoxicated by the
divine rasa of Çré Caitanya through the process of chanting His names and qualities.

paripürëaù sadä bhäti / gauräìga-guëa-garvvitaù
tad-äjïä-pälanäd gauòe / sthito 'pi tat-prakäçataù 16

[p.712]
paripürëaù - fully satisfied; sadä - forever; bhäti - He shines; gauräìga-guëagarvitaù - proud of the qualities of Gauräìga; tat-äjïä - His order; pälanät because of observing; gauòe - in Gauòa; sthitaù - remained; api - still; tatprakäçataù - because of Gaura's revelation in His heart.
Being proud of the transcendental qualities shown by Çré Gauräìga, Nityänanda
experienced total fulfillment. Following Gauräìga's order, He remained in Gauòadeça, experiencing the expansion of Mahäprabhu within His heart.

svecchä-mayo rasa-jïo 'sau / ko veda tasya ceöitam
tad-darçana-samutkaëöho / yayau çré-puruottamam 17
sva-icchä-mayaù - free-willed; rasa-jïaù - savant of rasa; asau - He; kaù - who?;
veda - knows; tasya - His; ceöitam - activities; tat-darçana - the sight of Him;
samutkaëöhaù - very eager; yayau - went; çré-puruottamam - Puré.
However, that sage of rasa is fully independent in His desires. Who can
comprehend the purpose of His activities? Feeling a great eagerness to behold His
Lord, Nityänanda returned to Çré Puruñottama Kñetra.

pupa-väöé samäsädya / dhyäyan gauräìga-sundaram
utthäya praëamad bhümau / nipatya praëaman muhuù 18
pupa-väöém - a flower garden; samäsädya - reaching; dhyäyan - meditating;
gauräìga-sundaram - on the beautiful Golden Lord; utthäya - rising; praëamat He bowed down; bhümau - on the earth; nipatya - falling; praëaman - bowing
down with prayers; muhuù - repeatedly.
Upon reaching the flower garden where the Lord was resting, Nityänanda saw the
form of Gauräìga Sundara and entered into trance. Then He arose and bowed down
on the earth. Again and again He rose and fell while offering prostrated obeisances
and prayers to Çré Caitanya.

[p.713]
huìkära-gambhérärävair / jaya-gauräìga-nisvanaiù
tuöäva parama-préto / gaura-candra mahä-sukhé 19
huìkära-gambhéra-ärävaiù - with deep roars and cries; jaya-gauräìganisvanaiù - with cries; tuöäva - He praised; parama-prétaù - very loving; gauracandram - the Golden Moon; mahä-sukhé - very happy.
With deep roaring cries of "Jaya Gauräìga!" Nityänanda Prabhu praised Gaura
Candra in great love and happiness.

eva paraspara këa-rämau hi parameçvarau
prema-bhakti-rasäköau / cakratur abhivandanam 20
evam - thus; parasparam - mutual; këa-rämau - Gaura and Nitäi; hi - certainly;
parama-éçvarau - Supreme Controllers; prema-bhakti - loving devotion; rasaäköau - attracted to the mellows; cakratuù - performed; abhivandanam - offering
honor.
In this same manner, the two Supreme Lords, Räma and Kåñëa, offered one another
praise, Their hearts fascinated with the mellows of prema-bhakti.

çré-çacé-nandanaù präha / çré-nityänandam éçvaram
nanda-putra bhavän nanda-goöha-bhakti-pradaù sadä 21
çré-çacé-nandanaù - the son of Çacé; präha - said; çré-nityänandam - to the
eternally blissful Lord; éçvaram - the Supreme Lord; nanda-putra - O son of
Nanda; bhavän - Your honor; nanda-goöha - Nanda's family; bhakti-pradaù bestower of devotion; sadä - always.
The splendid son of Çacé said to Çré Nityänanda I~çvara, "O son of Nanda, Your
Grace is forever devoted to the service of Your father's cows.

alaìkärädi-rüpeëa / navadhä bhaktim uttamäm

[p.714]
paçyämi tava dehe ca / këa-keli-sukhärëave 22
alaìkära-ädi - ornaments, etc.; rüpeëa - by the form; navadhä - nine-fold;
bhaktim - devotion; uttamäm - transcendental; paçyämi - I see; tava - Your; dehe in the body; ca - and; këa-keli - of Kåñëa's sports; sukha-arëave - in the ocean of
pleasure.
"Yet I perceive that within Your body, which is the blissful oceanic abode of
Kåñëa's sportive léläs, the nine-fold processes of bhakti are present in the form of
various ornaments.

nanda-gokula-väsinä / bhaktir eva su-durlabhä
bhävyate çuddha-bhävaiç ca / labhyate vä naraiù kvacit 23
nanda-gokula-väsinäm - of the residents of Gokula, under Nanda's rule;
bhaktiù - devotion; eva - indeed; su-durlabhä - very difficult to obtain; bhävyate it is comprehended; çuddha-bhävai - by pure consciousness; ca - and; labhyate is obtainable; vä - perhaps; naraiù - by men; kvacit - occasionally.
"That extremely rare devotion exhibited by the residents of Nanda's Gokula can
only be experienced by devotees in totally purified consciousness. Thus it may
rarely be attained by humankind, if at all.

tä bhakti tva ca prétyä hi / stré-bälädibhyaù svecchayä
dadäsi ko bhaväs tatra / dätästéti vadäçu me 24
täm bhaktim - that devotion; tvam - You; ca - and; prétyä - by love; hi certainly; stré-bäla-ädibhyaù - amongst those headed by women and children;
sva-icchayä - by Your own wish; dadäsi - You give; kaù - who?; bhavän - your
honor; tatra - there; dätä - donor; asti - it is; iti - thus; vada - do tell; äçu immediately; me - to Me.
"But by Your own sweet will, You lovingly award that most rare jewel of bhakti
even to women, children and others. Oh! Frankly tell Me - is there any other

[p.715]
charitable person to be found such as Your Grace?"

sa präha prahasan nätha / dätä hartä ca rakitä
prema-daù karuëas teä / tvam eva sarvva-prerakaù 25
saù - He; präha - said; prahasan - laughing; nätha - O Lord; dätä - donor; hartä thief; ca - and; rakitä - protector; prema-daù - giver of love; karuëaù - mercy;
teäm - their; tvam - You; eva - indeed; sarva-prerakaù - He who sets everything
into motion.
Nityänanda laughed and replied, "He Nätha! It is You who give, who take away,
and who maintain us all. It is only You who mercifully bestows prema on those
souls, for You inspire all living beings within their hearts."

ekaù sa-parado nityänando viçvambharo 'paraù
svarüpädyaiù sadä prema-pürëa-änanda-vigrahau 26
ekaù - one; sa-paradaù - with associates; nitya-änandaù - perpetual joy
personified; viçvambharaù - the maintainer of the universes; aparaù - the other;
svarüpa-ädyaiù - with those headed by Svarüpa; sadä - ever; prema-pürëaù - full
of love; änanda-vigrahau - the two forms of bliss.
On one side stands Nityänanda with His associates, and on the other stands
Viçvambhara, accompanied by Svarüpa and his assistants such as Raghunätha Däsa.
Both of the Lord's blissful forms are forever filled with prema.

gadädhareëa ca sama / sevyamänau nirantaram
kréòataù sva-sukha këa-kérttana-prema-vihvalau 27
gadädhareëa - by Gadädhara; ca - and; samam - by; sevyamänau - served;
nirantaram - continously; kréòataù - diverting; sva-sukham - in the pleasure of
Their own nature; këa-kértana - through chanting Kåñëa's names; premavihvalau - overwhelmed by love.

[p.716]
The two Lords enjoy Themselves according to Their unique natures, and They are
rendered service continuously by Gadädhara. They become overwhelmed with love
for Kåñëa as They chant His various names as follows:

yaçodä-nandanaù këaù / çré-gopé-präëa-vallabhaù
çré-rädhä-ramaëo rämänujo räsa-rasotsukaù 28
yaçodä-nandanaù - the delight of Yaçodä; këaù - the all-attractive; çré-gopépräëa-vallabhaù - whose love is the life of the gopés; çré-rädhä-ramaëaù - the
lover of Çré Rädhä; räma-anujaù - the younger brother of Räma; räsa-rasautsukaù - eager for the mellow of the räsa-lélä.
"The delightful son of Yaçodä (Yaçodä-nandana) is all-attractive (Kåñëa) and more
dear to the gopés than their own life-breath (Çré Gopé-präëa-vallabha). He is the
lover of Çré Rädhä (Çré Rädhä-Ramaëa), the younger brother of Räma (Räma-anuja),
and is ever eager for the mellows of the räsa dance (Räsa-rasa-utsuka)."

rohiëé-nandanaù këo / yajïo rämo balo hariù
revaté-präëa-näthaç ca / räsa-keli-mahotsavaù 29
rohiëé-nandanaù - the delight of Rohiëé; k-ëaù - the ender of the cycle of birth
and death; yajïaù - sacrifice; rämaù - the supreme enjoyer; balaù - powerful;
hariù - the remover of sin; revaté-präëa-näthaù - the Lord of Revaté's life; ca and; räsa-keli - rasa-fun; mahä-utsavaù - very festive.
"The delightful son of Rohiëé (Rohiëé-nandana) stops the repetition of birth and
death (Kåñëa). He is personified sacrifice (Yajïa), the supreme enjoyer (Räma), and
all-powerful (Bala). He steals away the misfortune of conditioned souls (Hari), and
is the Lord of Revaté's life-breath (Revaté-präëa-nätha). He revels in the great festival
of räsa sports (Räsa-keli-mahotsava)."

iti näma pragäyantau / bhakta-varga-samanvitau
çré-këa-caitanya-nityänanda-rämau smaret tu tau 30

[p.717]
iti - thus; näma - name; pragäyantau - singing; bhakta-varga-samanvitau together with the group of devotees; çré-këa-caitanya - the avatära for the age of
quarrel; nityänanda-rämau; smaret - He should remember; tu - indeed; tau - the
Two.
Thus should one indeed remember these two - Çré Kåñëa Caitanya and Çré
Nityänanda Räma - as They proclaim in song Their own holy names accompanied by
their devotees.

Thus ends the Twenty-fourth Sarga entitled "Gaura's Pastimes Among the
Circle of His Devotees," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya
Carita.

* * *
Twenty-fifth Sarga
çré-këa-janma-ädi-gopénätha-darçana-paryanta-kathanam
The Narration of the Lord's Pastimes
Beginning with the Birth of Kåñëa Caitanya
and Ending with the Darçana of Gopénätha

etat te kathita sütra / çré-këa-carita dvija
varëayiyanti vistäraiù / çréväsädyä mahattamäù 1
etat - this; te - to you; kathitam - told; sütram - condensed form; çré-këacaritam - the character of Kåñëa Caitanya; dvija - O brähmaëa; varëayiyanti they shall describe; vistäraiù - with elaborate accounts; çréväsa-ädyäù - headed
by; mahattamäù - very great souls.
[Muräri Gupta continued narrating to Dämodara Paëita:] O brähmaëa, the

[p.718]
biography of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya has thus been narrated in an abridged form. Later,
Çréväsa and other great souls will relate it in detail.

atränuvarëyate 'bhékëa / çré-gauräìgo mahä-prabhuù
phaläsväda-nimittena / kathyate tad-anukramaù 2
atra - now; anuvarëyate - narrated; abhékëam - continuously; çré-gauräìgaù the golden Lord; mahä-prabhuù - the great Master; phala-äsväda-nimittena - with
the fruit obtained by relishing; kathyate - is told; tat-anukramaù - in sequence.
Now, the history of Çré Gauräìga Mahäprabhu will be continuously related in
sequence, as well as the benefits obtained by the reader who relishes it.

avatära-käraëa ca / çré-këasya viceöitam
bahir-mukhän janän dövä / näradasyänutäpanaù 3
avatära-käraëam - the cause for His descent; ca - and; çré-këasya - of Çré
Kåñëa; viceöitam - activities; bahi-mukhän - materialistic; janän - people; dövä seeing; näradasya - of Närada; anutäpanaù - grief.
The cause for Çré Kåñëa's descent and activities was the compassion felt by the sage
Närada, after he sadly saw the materialistic state of humanity in the age of quarrel.

vaikuëöha-gamana cäpi / çré-këenäpi säntvanam
sarvveäm avatäräëä / kathana këa-janma ca 4
vaikuëöha-gamanam - passage to Vaikuëöha; ca - and; api - also; çré-këena - by
Çré Kåñëa; api - also; säntvanam - pacifying; sarveäm - of all; avatäräëäm - of
avatäras; kathanam - narration; këa-janma - Kåñëa's birth; ca - and.
Then follows the narration of Çré Närada Muni's passage to the spiritual world of
Vaikuëöha, how Lord Kåñëa appeased his sorrow, the enumeration of all the
avatäras, and Çré Kåñëa's appearance within this material world.

[p.719]
bälya-lélädika caiva / brähmaëasyänna-bhojanam
viçvarüpasya sannyäsa / nityänandätmakasya ca 5
bälya-lélä-ädikam - childhood pastimes and so on; ca - and; eva - indeed;
brähmaëasya - of the brähmaëa; anna-bhojanam - eating the rice; viçvarüpasya of Viçvarüpa; sannyäsam - renunciation; nityänanda-ätmakasya - whose identity
was Nityänanda; ca - and.
Next come descriptions of Kåñëa's various childhood pastimes, including the story
how Gaura Gopäla ate the rice cooked by the brähmaëa on pilgrimage, and how Çré
Viçvarüpa (who is none other than Lord Nityänanda) accepted sannyäsa.

jagannäthasya sasthäna / duùkha-çokänuvarëanam
vidyä-viläsa-lävaëyam / mät-duùkha-vimocanam 6
jagannäthasya - of Jagannätha Miçra; sasthänam - death; duùkha-çoka - grief
and lamentation; anuvarëanam - narration; vidyä-viläsa - pastimes of
scholarship; lävaëyam - loveliness; mät-duùkha - mother's sorrow; vimocanam liberating.
Thereafter follows the narration of Jagannätha Miçra's departure from this world,
the grief and lamentation which attended that occasion, the beauty of Çré Gaura as
He performed pastimes of scholarship, and also how He freed His mother from all
sorrow.

lakmé-pariëaya caiva / pürvva-deçe gate prabhau
tasyäù sasthitir eva syät / çacé-çokäpanodanam 7
lakmé-pariëayam - marriage with Lakñmé Devé; ca - and; eva - indeed; pürvadeçe - in the eastern countries; gate - went; prabhau - the Lord; tasyäù - her;
sasthitiù - death; eva - indeed; syät - it happened; çacé-çoka - the grief of Çacé;
apanodanam - dispelling.

[p.720]
The story of Prabhu's marriage with Lakñmé Devé and His subsequent departure
for the eastern countries, as well as Lakñmé's death, and the way in which Gaura
dispelled Çacé Mätä's grief, are all narrated.

viëu-priyä-pariëaya / paramänanda-vaibhavam
puréçvara-darçana ca / gayäktya-samäpanam 8
viëu-priyä-pariëayam - marriage with Viñëu-priyä; parama-änanda-vaibhavam the influence of His transcendental bliss; puré-éçvara-darçanam - seeing I~çvara
Puré; ca - and; gayä-ktya-samäpanam - accomplishing duties to His father in
Gayä.
Then follows the glorious narration of Gaura's marriage with Çrématé Viñëu-priyä,
and the influence of His transcendental bliss. Gaura met with Çré I~çvara Puré and
fulfilled His duty to His father at Gayä.

bhäva-prakäçana caiva / varäha-veça-dhäraëam
saìkérttana-çubhärambha / megha-niùsäraëa tathä 9
bhäva-prakäçanam - appearance of the symptoms of ecstasy; ca - and; eva indeed; varäha-veça-dhäraëam - taking the appearance of Varäha-deva;
saìkértana - of congregational chanting; çubha-ärambham - the auspicious
beginning; megha-niùsäraëam - dispelling of the clouds; tathä - also.
The symptoms of transcendental ecstasy then made their first appearance on Çré
Gauräìga's body. Gaura accepted the form of Varäha-deva. He inaugurated the
auspicious movement of Hari-nama-saìkértana, and dispelled thunderclouds as they
threatened to interrupt the chanting.

nämärtha-kalpanäd eva / gaìgä-patana-nirgamam
adhéna bhakta-vargänä / çrélädvaitasya melanam 10
näma-artha-kalpanät - due to imagined meanings of the names; eva - indeed;

[p.721]
gaìgä-patana-nirgamam - going away and falling in the Gaìgä; adhénam submission; bhakta-vargänäm - to the group of devotees; çréla-advaitasya - with
Çréla Advaita; melanam - meeting.
Gaura left that spot where a student made an imaginative interpretation of Çré
Hari's names and plunged into the Gaìgä with all His clothes. Gaura showed
submission to the assembly of devotees by offering obeisances to the vaiëavas when
He met with Çréla Advaitäcärya.

bhaktänukampana caiva / çré-nityänanda-darçanam
aò-bhuja-darçanänanda / balaräma-prakäçakam 11
bhakta-anukampanam - the Lord's sympathy with His devotees; ca - and; eva indeed; çré-nityänanda-darçanam - first sight of Çré Nityänanda; aö-bhuja-darçanaänandam - joy at the sight of His six-armed form; balaräma-prakäçakam manifestation of Balaräma.
Gaura displayed sympathy for His bhaktas and had His first darçana of Çré
Nityänanda Prabhu, Nityänanda tasted änanda when He saw Çré Caitanya's sixarmed form, and Gaura revealed that Nitäi is none other than Balaräma.

bhakti-rasa-samäköa / harer mandira-märjjanam
bhakta-datta-grahaëa ca / mahaiçvarya-pradarçanam 12
bhakti-rasa-samäköam - utter fascination by the mellow of devotion; hareù - of
Hari; mandira-märjanam - cleaning the temple; bhakta-datta-grahaëam accepting the things offered by the devotees; ca - and; mahä-aiçvarya - great
opulence; pradarçanam - display.
Çré Gaura Hari became utterly fascinated with the bhakti-rasa, and He cleansed the
temple of Çré Hari. He accepted offerings made by His bhaktas, and showed a great
form filled with all opulence.

ntya-gäna-viläsädi / gaìgä-majjanam eva ca

[p.722]
brahma-çäpa-vara caiva / jéva-nistära-hetukam 13
ntya-gäna - dancing, singing; viläsa - pastimes; ädi - and so on; gaìgämajjanam - diving in the Gaìgä; eva - indeed; ca - and; brahma - of the
brähmaëa; çäpa-varam - the blessing-curse; ca - and; eva - indeed; jéva-nistära deliverance of the living beings; hetukam - causing.
Then follow Gauräìga's pastimes of dancing, singing and so forth, diving in the
Gaìgä, and the brähmaëa's blessing-curse, which brought about the deliverance of
all living entities.

balaräma-rasäveça-madhu-pänädi-narttanam
gopé-veça-dhara ntya-gäna-mädhuryya-varëanam 14
balaräma-rasa - in the mellows of Balaräma; äveça - absorption; madhu-pänaädi - honey drinking and so forth; nartanam - dancing; gopé-veça - dress of a
gopé; dharam - wearing; ntya-gäna - singing, dancing; mädhurya - sweetness;
varëanam - description.
While absorbed in the mood of Balaräma, Gaura Hari drank honey wine, and
thereafter He danced and performed other pastimes. Then a description of the sweet
singing and dancing of Çré Caitanya as He wore the dress of a gopé follows.

sannyäsopakrame gupta-muräry-ädika-säntvanam
navadvépa-kaëöakäkhya-pura-väsi-viläpanam 15
sannyäsa-upakrame - setting about taking sannyäsa; gupta-muräri-ädika Muräri Gupta and others; säntvanam - pacifying; navadvépa-kaëöaka - of
Navadvépa and Kaëöaka; äkhya - called; pura-väsi - town residents; viläpanam lamentation.
As Gaura set off to take sannyäsa, He pacified the hearts of Muräri Gupta and
others. Then the townsfolk of Navadvépa and Kaëöaka lamented greatly.

[p.723]
sannyäsa-näma-grahaëa / premänanda-prakäçanam
räòha-deça-ktärtha ca / candra-çekhara-preaëam 16
sannyäsa-näma-grahaëam - taking His sannyäsa name, prema-änandaprakäçanam - revealing the bliss of love for Kåñëa; räòha-deça - of the land of
Räha; kta - made; artham - meaning; ca - and; candra-çekhara-preaëam - sending
of Candra-Çekhara.
After Gaura accepted His sannyäsa name, Çré Këa Caitanya, He revealed to His
guru the bliss of love for Kåñëa. While wandering in the land of Räha-deça, Gaura
endowed that land with meaning, and then He sent Candra Çekhara as a messenger
to His Navadvépa bhaktas .

navadvépasya ca nityänandena duùkha-näçanam
çänti-pura-viläsa ca / bhakta-varga-samanvitam 17
navadvépasya - of Navadvépa; ca - and; nityänandena - by Nityänanda; duùkhanäçanam - destruction of the grief; çänti-pura-viläsam - pastimes in Çänti-pura;
ca - and; bhakta-varga-samanvitam - together with the assembly of devotees.
Through the agency of Nityänanda Prabhu, Gaura destroyed the sorrow of the
people of Navadvépa, and in Çänti-pura He performed pastimes amongst the
assembled bhaktas.

tato daëòa-bhaïjana çré-gopénäthasya darçanam
varäha-darçana puëya / virajä-darçana tathä 18
tataù - then; daëòa-bhaïjanam - breaking of the sannyäsa rod; çré-gopénäthasya
- of Çré Gopénätha; darçanam - vision; varäha-darçanam - seeing Varäha-deva;
puëyam - purifying; virajä-darçanam - seeing Virajä; tathä - also.
Then follows the breaking of the Lord's daëa, darçana of Gopénätha, Lord Varäha's
purifying darçana, and the darçana of the river Virajä.

[p.724]
vaitaraëé-yäjapura-çré-çiva-liìga-darçanam
nänä-bhäva-prakäça çré-bhüvaneçvara-darçanam 19
vaitaraëé - of the Vaitaraëé river; yajapura - of Yäjapura; çré-çiva-liìga - of the
Çiva liìgam; darçanam - sight; nänä-bhäva-prakäçam - revealing many ecstacies;
çré-bhüvana-éçvara - Lord Çiva, master of the three worlds; darçanam - the sight.
Lord Gauräìga took darçana of the sacred river Vaitaraëé, the town of Yäjapura,
and the Çiva-liìgams present there. After revealing many moods of ecstacy, Gaura
took direct darçana of Lord Çré Çiva, master of the three worlds.

nirmmälya-grahaëasyäpi / vidhäna-kathana çubham
çré-mandirastha-gopäla-darçana rodana prabhoù 20
nirmälya - food remants; grahaëasya - accepting; api - also; vidhäna-kathanam history illustrating the precept; çubham - auspicious; çré-mandira - resplendent
temple; stha - situated; gopäla-darçanam - sight of Gopäla; rodanam - weeping;
prabhoù - of Prabhu.
Gaura accepted Çré Çiva's food-remnants, and Muräri Gupta then explained the
principle behind this action. As He saw the Deity of Gopäla (Gopénätha) in His
temple at Remunä, Gaura Prabhu wept.

märkaëòeya-sarasy eva / çiva-liìga pradarçanam
tataù çrémaj-jagannätha-darçanänanda-vaibhavam 21
märkaëòeya-sarasi - in the lake of Märkaëeya; eva - indeed; çiva-liìgam phallic form of Çiva; pradarçanam - beholding; tataù - then; çrémat jagannätha the Lord of the universe; darçana-änanda - happiness of seeing; vaibhavam magnificence.
Within the lake of the sage Märkeëòeya, Gaura beheld the liìgam of Çré Çiva, and

[p.725]
when He saw the splendrous form of Jagannätha Svämé, He tasted great bliss.

särvvabhaumädibhiù särddha / punaù çré-mukha-darçanam
çréman-mahä-prasädasya / vandana bhojana çubham 22
särvabhauma - by Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya; ädibhiù - with those headed;
särdham - in company; punaù - again; çré-mukha-darçanam - the sight of the
radiant face; çrémat-mahä-prasädasya - of the food remnants awarding great
mercy; vandanam - praising; bhojanam - eating; çubham - auspicious.
Again Gauräìga took darçana of the radiant face of Lord Jagannätha, and after
offering prayers in praise of Jagannätha-mahä-prasädam, He honored that auspicious
food.

särvabhauma-samuddhära / dakiëa-gamana hareù
kürmma-nätha-darçana ca / kürmma-vipränukampanam 23
särvabhauma - Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya; samuddhäram - deliverance of;
dakiëa-gamanam - travelling south; hareù - of Hari; kürma-nätha - the Deity of
Lord tortoise; darçanam - sacred sight; ca - and; kürma-vipra-anukampanam compassion to the vipra named Kürma.
Çré Caitanya delivered Särvabhauma Bhaööäcärya from the desert of monism. Then
travelling south, He took darçana of Kürma-deva and showed compassion on Kürma
vipra.

väsudeva-samuddhäram / çakti-saïcäraëa tathä
jiyaòäkhya-nsihasya / cariträsvädana sukham 24
väsudeva-samuddhäram - deliverance of Väsudeva; çakti - potency; saïcäraëam
- empowerment; tathä - also; jiyaòa-äkhya - named Jiyaòa; n-sihasya - of the
man-lion Deity; caritra - behavior; äsvädanam - relishing; sukham - happily.

[p.726]
After Gaura delivered the leper-brähmaëa named Väsudeva, He empowered both
him and the vipra Kürma with potency to preach the message of Godhead. In great
happiness, Gaura relished the history of Jiyaòa-Nåsiha.

çréla-rämänanda-räya-milana çubha-da çubham
puré-çré-mädhava-çiya-paramänanda-darçanam 25
çréla-rämänanda-räya-milanam - meeting with Rämänanda Räya; çubha-dam fortunate; çubham - pleasant; puré-çré-mädhava-çiya - disciple of Çré
Mädhavendra Puré; parama-änanda - Paramänanda Puré, supreme happiness;
darçanam - seeing.
Gauräìga Mahäprabhu had a most fortunate and pleasant meeting with Çréla
Rämänanda Räya. Then He took darçana of Paramänanda Puré, one of the disciples
of Çré Mädhavendra Puré.

païcavaté-räìga-ketra-raìganätha-pradarçanam
tatra çré-paramänanda-puré-prasthäpana prabhoù 26
païcavaté; räìga-ketra; raìganätha; pradarçanam - seeing; tatra - there; çréparamänanda-puré-prasthäpanam - sending forth of Paramänanda Puré; prabhoù by the Master
He beheld the eternal abode of Çré Sétä-Räma named Païcavaté, and saw
Raìganätha, the great Deity of Viñëu who is situated at Raìga-kñetra. Then Gaura
sent Çré Paramänanda Puré to stay at Jagannätha Puré.

setu-bandhe çréla-rämeçvara-liìga-pradarçanam
tataù çrémaj-jagannätha-darçanänanda-varëanam 27
setu-bandhe - at the beginning of the bridge to Laìka; çréla-räma-éçvara-liìga the phallus of Lord Çiva worshipped by Lord Räma for passage to Çré Laìkä (lit.
controller of Räma); pradarçanam - seeing; tataù - then; çrémat-jagannätha Lord of the universe; darçana-änanda - the joy of seeing; varëanam -

[p.727]
description.
Gaura Hari took darçana of the liìgam of Lord Çiva named Rämeçvara at SetuBandha. Thereafter He returned to Puré, and felt immense joy to once again see Lord
Jagannätha.

vndäraëya samuddiçya / gauòäbhigamana çubham
väcaspati-ghe këa / vaibhava paramädbhütam 28
vndäraëya-samuddiçya - heading for Våndävana; gauòa-abhigamanam - setting
forth for Bengal; çubham - pleasant; väcaspati-ghe - in the house of Väcaspati;
këam - Caitanya; vaibhavam - opulence; parama-adbhütam - very wonderful.
Indicating that His ultimate destination was Våndävana, Gaura Kåñëa set forth for
Gauòa. Then He displayed very amazing powers in the home of Väcaspati.

devänanda samuddiçya / çré-bhägavata-kérttanam
tad vaktur lakaëa cäpi / çrotuç ca kathita çubham 29
devänandam - Devänanda Paëita; samuddiçya - with reference to; çré-bhägavatakértanam - glorification of Bhägavatam; tat - that; vaktuù - of the speaker;
lakaëam - symptoms; ca - and; api - and; çrotuù - of the hearer; ca - and;
kathitam - told; çubham - sublime.
While giving guidance to Devänanda Paëita, Gaura proclaimed the glories of
Çrémad Bhägavatam and exlained that the qualification for a person who hears and
speaks the Çrémad Bhägavatam is freedom from envy.

çré-nsihänandena yat / kta jaìghälam uttamam
tena yathä rämakeli-këa-näöya-sthalävadhi 30
çré-nsihänandena - by Nåsihänanda Brahmacäré; yat - which; ktam - was done;
jaìghälam - running; uttamam - excellent; tena - by him; yathä - as; räma-keli-

[p.728]
këa-näöya-sthalä - the towns of Rämakeli and Këa-näöya-sthala (pavilion for
Kåñëa-lélä dancing); avadhi - up to.
Next the paths and excellent arrangements which were made within Çré
Nsihänanda Brahmacäré's mind as far as the town of Rämakeli and Kåñëa-näöyasthala are described.

gamana ca punaù çrélädvaita-geha-çubhägamaù
navadvépa-bhakta-varga-melana punar eva ca 31
gamanam - going; ca - and; punaù - again; çréla-advaita-geha - home of Advaita
_cärya; çubha-ägamaù - auspicious coming; navadvépa - at Navadvépa; bhaktavarga - assembly of devotees; melanam - meeting; punaù - again; eva - indeed; ca and.
Returning to Navadvépa, Gaura happily arrived at the house of Çré Advaitäcärya
and there met with the assembly of bhaktas.

çré-bhojana-sukha tatra / mätuç caraëa-vandanam
puruottamam äsädya / çré-gopénätha-darçanam 32
çré-bhojana-sukham - pleasantly took sacred foods offered to the Lord; tatra there; mätuù - of His mother; caraëa-vandanam - worshipping her feet; puruauttamam - the abode of the Supreme Person; äsädya - arriving; çré-gopénäthadarçanam - taking the sight of Çré Gopénätha.
After pleasantly accepting the Lord's prasädam, Gaura worshipped His mother's
feet, and while returning to Puruñottama Kñetra, He took darçana of Gopénätha in
Remuëä.

Thus ends the Sarga entitled "The Narration of the Lord's Pastimes Beginning
with the Birth of Kåñëa Caitanya and Ending with the Darçana of Gopénätha,"
in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré Caitanya Carita.

[p.729]
* * *
Twenty-sixth Sarga
vndävana-gamana-néläcala-ägamanarädhä-këa-mädhurya-prema-nirantara-äveña-paryantam
Mahäprabhu Visits Våndävana and Returns to Néläcala
to Forever Enter Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa's Transcendental Loving Affairs

vndävanasya gamane / bhakta-varga-viläpanam
säntvana cäpi teä vai / varëita prabhuëä ktam 1
vndävanasya - of Våndävana; gamane - going; bhakta-varga-viläpanam - the
lamentation of the assembly of devotees; säntvanam - pacifying; ca - and; api also; teäm - of them; vai - surely; varëitam - described; prabhuëä - by the master;
ktam - done.
When Gaura Prabhu departed for Våndävana, all of the bhaktas in Néläcala
lamented, and Prabhu consoled them.

vana-pathi krameëaiva / käçé-puryyäç ca darçanam
tathä viçveçvarasyäpi / tapanädeç ca melanam 2
vana-pathi - on the forest path; krameëa - gradually; eva - surely; käçé-puryä of the city of Käçé; ca - and; darçanam - sight; tathä - also; viçveçvarasya - of the
Deity named Viçveçvara; api - also; tapana-äde - of Tapana Miçra and the others;
ca - and; melanam - meeting.
After making gradual progress as He traveled on the jungle paths, Gaura saw the
city of Käçé and the Deity of Çiva named Viçveçvara. There He met with Tapana
Miçra and the other bhaktas of Käçé.

[p.730]
prayäge mädhava-deva-darçana yamunäm anu
agra-vana-reëukädi-mathurälokana tathä 3
prayäge - at Prayäga; mädhava-deva - the Deity of Mädhava; darçanam - seeing;
yamunäm anu - following the Yamunä; agra-vana - the forest of Agra; reëukä-ädi
- beginning at Reëukä; mathurä-älokanam - seeing Mathurä; tathä - also.
When He arrived at Prayäga, Gaura saw the Deity of Çré Kåñëa named Bindu
Mädhava. Then by following along the bank of Yamunä, He came to Agra-vana and
Reëukä, the birthplace of Lord Paraçuräma. From that place, Gaura saw the city of
Mathurä.

këa-däsena ca sama / ghaööa-küpädi-darçanam
vndäraëyädika sarvva / dvädaça-vanam eva ca 4
këa-däsena - with Kåñëa Däsa; ca - and; samam - together; ghaööa-küpa bathing places and wells; ädi - and so forth; darçanam - seeing; vndä-araëya the forest of Våndä; ädikam - headed by; sarvam - all; dvädaça-vanam - the
twelve forests; eva - verily; ca- - and.
Together in the company of Kåñëa Däsa, Gaura saw the sacred bathing places,
wells and so forth, as well as all twelve forests headed by Våndävana.

prati-gräma prati-vana / prati-kuëòa sanätanam
këa-nänä-prakäça ca / lélänukaraëa tathä 5
prati-grämam - every town; prati-vanam - every forest; prati-kuëòam - every
pond; sanätanam - ancient; këa-nänä - many pastimes of Kåñëa; prakäçam revealed; ca - and; lélä-anukaraëam - imitated pastimes; tathä - also.
At each and every town, forest and pond He visited, many eternal pastimes were
revealed to Gaura, and He would act out those pastimes as He experienced them.

[p.731]
këa-janma samärabhya / tathä kasa-vadhädikam
varëana çravaëa cäpi / tat tad rüpa-prakäçanam 6
këa-janma - the birth of Kåñëa; samärabhya - beginning with; tathä - until;
kasa-vadha - the killing of Kasa; ädikam - and so on; varëanam - describing;
çravaëam - hearing; ca - and; api - also; tat tat - those very; rüpa-prakäçanam revelation of the forms.
As the léläs beginning with the birth of Kåñëa until the killing of Kasa were
described and heard, each and every one of them were manifested in Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu's heart.

bhävonmäda-vikärädi-varëana paramädbhutam
sarvva-vraja-niväsinä / ghe ghe prakäçanam 7
bhäva - ecstasy; unmäda - madness; vikära - transformation; ädi - headed by;
varëanam - desciption; parama-adbhutam - extremely wonderful; sarva-vrajaniväsinäm - for all the residents of Vraja; ghe ghe - home to home; prakäçanam displaying.
The description of Mahäprabhu's ecstacies, divine madness, and the bodily
transformations arising therefrom are extremely amazing. As He travelled from
home to home, Gaura displayed them to all the residents of Vraja.

punar ägamana caiva / prayäge rüpa-melanam
käçyä sanätanasyäpi / tapanädyanurodhataù 8
puna - again; ägamanam - returning; ca - and; eva - indeed; prayäge - in
Prayäga; rüpa-melanam - meeting with Rupa Gosvämé; käçyäm - in Väräëasé;
sanätanasya - of Sanätana Gosvämé; api - also; tapana - Tapana Miçra; ädi - and
the others; anurodhataù - fulfilling the wishes.

[p.732]
Again He returned to Prayäga and met with Rüpa Gosvämé. Thereafter, Gaura met
Sanätana Gosvämé in Käçé, and also fulfilled the wishes of the devotees there headed
by Tapana Miçra.

käçé-väsé-janoddhära-carita kilbiäpaham
takra-päna ca gopasya / navadvépa-çubhägamaù 9
käçé-väsé - the residents of Käçé; jana - people; uddhära - delivering; caritam the character; kilbia-apaham - removing the sins; takra-pänam - drinking the
buttermilk; ca - and; gopasya - of the cowherd; navadvépa; çubha - auspicious;
ägamaù - coming.
(By mercifully giving the process of Hari-näma-saìkértana) Çré Caitanya delivered
the people of Käçé from sin. Then after drinking a pot of buttermilk given by a gopa,
He travelled on and arrived in the land of the nine islands, bringing auspiciousness
with Him.

tatra nitya-vihära ca / gaurédäsa-ghe 'pi ca
punar äcärya-gehe ca / gamana çubha-darçanam 10
tatra - there; nitya-vihäram - eternal pleasures; ca - and; gaurédäsa-ghe - in the
home of Gaurédäsa; api - indeed; ca - and; puna - again; äcärya-gehe - in the
home of Çré Advaita; ca - and; gamanam - coming; çubha-darçanam - blessed
vision.
There, Çré Çré Gaura-Nityänanda remain perpetually within the house of Gaurédäsa
Paëita to enjoy Their pleasure-pastimes, yet simultaneously Their Lordships also
departed and journeyed to the house of Çré Advaita to bestow Their blessed vision
on Him.

bhakta-varga-rasolläso / mätuç caraëa-vandanam
mädhavärädhana tatra / nélädri-gamana tataù 11
bhakta-varga - the group of devotees; rasa - mellow; ulläsa - sporting

[p.733]
brilliantly; mätu - of His mother; caraëa-vandanam - offering prayers to the feet;
mädhava - Mädhavendra Puré; ärädhanam - worship; tatra - there; néla-adri - the
blue hill, Jagannätha Puré; gamanam - going; tataù - then.
Çacé-nandana sported brilliantly amidst the assembly of bhaktas, and then offered
prayers unto the feet of His mother. He worshipped Çré Mädhava Puré on the day of
his appearance, and thereafter departed for Nélädri.

pratäpa-rudra-santräëa / ratha-yäträdi-darçanam
narendra-sarasi bhakta-melana hari-kérttanam 12
pratäpa-rudra; santräëam - deliverance; ratha-yäträ - the chariot festival; ädi headed by; darçanam - seeing; narendra-sarasi - in the lake of Narendra; bhaktamelanam - meeting the devotees; hari-kértanam - chanting the names of Hari.
Çré Gaura Hari then delivered Mahäräja Pratäpa Rudra, the sovereign king of
Orissa. He saw the Ratha-yäträ festival of Lord Jagannätha, Balaräma Mahäräja and
Subhadrä Mahäräëé. Meeting with His bhaktas at Narendra Sarovara, the lake of the
king, He performed Hari-näma-saìkértana in their company.

tair datta bhojana cäpi / gauräìga-guëa-kérttanam
ktam advaita-prabhuëä / räma-däsänukampanam 13
tai - by them; dattam - given; bhojanam - food; ca api - and also; gauräìga-guëa
- the qualities of the Golden Lord; kértanam - chanting; ktam - done; advaitaprabhuëä - by Lord Advaita; räma-däsa-anukampanam - showing sympathy for
Rämadäsa.
After the bhaktas served Këa-prasäda to Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, Advaita Prabhu
depicted in song the qualities of Çré Gauräìga, and then Mahäprabhu showed
sympathy toward Rämadäsa, an impoverished brähmaëa from southern Bhärata.

nityänanda-vihärädi-gauräìga-guëa-kérttanam
divyonmadädi-bhävänä / präkaöya syäd anantaram 14

[p.734]
rämänanda-svarüpädyai / räsa-saìkérttanädikam
nityänanda-vihärädi-varëana gaura-darçanam 15
nityänanda-vihära - enjoyment; ädi - and so on; gauräìga-guëa - the qualities
of the golden Lord; kértanam - chanting; divya-unmada-ädi-bhävänäm - of the
moods of divine madness and other ecstatic symptoms; präkaöyam - manifest;
syät - it may be; anantaram - afterwards; rämänanda-svarüpa-ädyai - headed by
Rämänanda and Svarüpa; räsa-saìkértana - reciting the verses of the räsa
pastimes; ädikam - headed by; nityänanda-vihära - the enjoyment of Nityänanda;
ädi - and so on; varëanam - narration; gaura-darçanam - the vision of Gaura.
Then the pleasure-pastimes of Çré Nityänanda were portrayed, including
Nityänanda's kértanas depicting the qualities of Çré Gauräìga. From then onwards
during Gauräìga's manifest pastimes, the Lord displayed the ecstatic moods of
Kåñëa consciousness beginning with divine madness while Ramänanda Räya and
Svarüpa Dämodara recited appropriate verses from Çrémad Bhägavatam illustrating
the räsa-lélä and other pastimes. Nityänanda Prabhu exhibited pleasure pastimes in
the areas around Navadvépa, and finally had Gaura-darçana in Puri after a prolonged
separation.

guëòicäyä pupa-väöyä / viräja ca sa-bhaktayoù
gadädhara-sama nityänanda-gauräìga-candrayoù 16
guëòicäyäm - in the Guëicä Mandira; pupa-väöyäm - garden of flowers; viräjam
- shining; ca - and; sa-bhaktayoù - with their devotees; gadädhara-samam - with
Gadädhara; nityänanda-gauräìga-candrayoù - of the two moons of Gaura and
Nitäi.
The two moons, Nityänanda and Gauräìga, shone in a flower garden near the
Guëicä Mandira along with Gadädhara and all Their bhaktas.

eva saïcintayan këa-caitanya-carita budhaù
çuddha-premämta-nidhau / nimagno bhavati sadä 17

[p.735]
evam - thus; saïcintayan - contemplating; këa-caitanya - of Kåñëa Caitanya;
caritam - the character; budhaù - the intelligent; çuddha-prema - pure love; amtanidhau - in the ocean of nectar; nimagna - immersed; bhavati - becomes; sadä always.
The wise man who contemplates the life, character and activities of Kåñëa Caitanya
narrated herein becomes forever immersed in an ambrosial ocean of pure love.

éçvaro 'pi svaya këo / yato bhakti-rasäçrayaù
äsvädayati sva-prema-näma-mädhuryyam adbhutam 18
éçvara - the Supreme Lord; api - the very; svayam - Himself; këa - the allattractive; yata - because; bhakti-rasa - of the mellows of devotion; äçrayaù shelter; äsvädayati - relishes; sva-prema - His own love; näma-mädhuryam - the
sweetness of His names; adbhutam - wonderful.
Although Çré Gauräìga Mahäprabhu is directly the all-attractive Supreme Lord Çré
Kåñëa, He appeared as the abode of devotional mellows and relished the marvelous
sweetness of love for Himself through the chanting of His names.

tal-léläsvädanäd eva / ki na syät prema-vaibhavam
ato nirmatsaro bhütvä / çëu gauräìga-kérttanam 19
tat - that; lélä - pastime; äsvädanät - by relishing; eva - indeed; kim - why?; na not; syät - it may be; prema-vaibhavam - the opulence of love for Kåñëa; ata therefore; nirmatsara - non-envious; bhütvä - becoming; çëu - please listen;
gauräìga-kértanam - the chanting of Çré Gauräìga's glories.
After a person has relished His sublime pastimes, how is it possible that the
opulences of Kåñëa-prema do not arise in his heart? (It is surely not possible!)
Therefore, after freeing yourself from any tinge of envy, just hear submissively the
descriptions of Çré Gauräìga's glories.

[p.736]
catväraù prakramä asya / sargädi aöa-saptatiù
prathamaù oòaçaç cäpi / dvitéyo 'öa-daças tathä 20
catväraù - four; prakramä - Cantos; asya - of this book; sarga-ädi - Chapter,
etc.; aöa-saptatiù - seventy-eight; prathamaù - the first; oòaça - sixteen; ca - and;
api - also; dvitéya - second; aöa-daça - eighteen; tathä - as well.
This book is comprised of four Prakramas and seventy-eight Sargas. The first
Prakrama contains sixteen Sargas, and the second has eighteen.

ttéyas tu tathaiva syät / cathurthaù aò-viçatiù
ekonaviça-çataçaù / sapta-viçädhikäni ca 21
ttéya - the third; syät - may be; cathurthaù - fourth; aö-viçatiù - twenty-six; ekaunaviça-çataçaù - nineteen hundred; sapta-viça - twenty-seven; adhikäni - in
addition; ca - and.
The third Prakrama also has eighteen Sargas, and the fourth has twenty-six.
The book contains a total of nineteen hundred and twenty-seven çlokas.

çlokäni su-paöhann eva / rasikaù paramädarät
prema-pürëo bhaven nitya / çravaëäd api bhävukuù 22
çlokäni - verses; su-paöhan - nicely recited; eva - certainly; rasikaù - an expert
in appreciating rasa; parama-ädarät - through great respect; prema-pürëa satisfied by love; bhavet - can become; nityam - always; çravaëät - from hearing;
api - also; bhävukuù - blessed, having a taste for the sublime.
A rasika with a taste for the sublime who recites or even hears these verses with
great attention can attain the blessed state of perpetual fulfillment in Kåñëa-prema.

çrutvä sarvva nityänanda-gauräìga-guëa-kérttanam
muräri sampraëamyäha / çré-dämodara-paëòitaù 23

[p.737]
çrutvä - hearing; sarvam - all; nityänanda-gauräìga-guëa-kértanam - chanting
about the attributes of Gaura and Nitäi; murärim - Muräri Gupta; sampraëamya fully prostrating; äha - he said; çré-dämodara-paëòitaù - the scholar Çré
Dämodara.
After Çré Dämodara Paëita heard all these descriptions of the transcendental
attributes of Çré Çré Nityänanda-Gauräìga, he prostrated himself humbly before
Muräri Gupta and said:

ktärtho 'ha ktärtho 'ha / krtärtho 'ha na saçayaù
dhanyo 'si hi bhavän këa-caitanya-rasa-pürakaù 24
kta-artha - desires fulfilled; aham - I; kta-artha - desires fulfilled; aham - I; krtaartha; aha - I; na saçayaù - without doubt; dhanya - glorious; asi - you are; hi certainly; bhavän - your grace; këa-caitanya - Lord Kåñëa, the character of the
living force; rasa-pürakaù - filler of the rasa.
"I am now fulfilled! All my desires are fulfilled! My desires are fulfilled without a
doubt! Certainly you are most glorious, for your grace has filled my heart full with
the mellows of Çré Kåñëa Caitanya."

çrélädvaita-prabhur api sukha çréla-gauräìga-candralélä-ratna-samaïjasam su-madhuram äçrutya haräd asau

ta präha çré-muräri tvam api khalu sadä räma-candrasya
tasmäd etat tvayi prakaöita grantha-ratna hi tena 25

çréla-ädvaita-prabhu; api - also; sukham - happily; çréla-gauräìga-candra - the
Golden moon-like Lord; lélä-ratna - jewel-pastimes; samaïjasam - authentic; sumadhuram - very sweet; äçrutya - hearing; harät - out of joy; asau - He; tam him; präha - He said; çré-murärim - to Muräri Gupta; tvam - you; api - indeed;
khalu - verily; sadä - always; räma-candrasya - of Çré Räma Candra; tasmät therefore; etat - this; tvayi - unto you; prakaöitam - revealed; grantha-ratnam this jewel of a book; hi - certainly; tena - for this reason.

[p.738]
When Çréla _dvaita Prabhu happily heard these bonafide and extremely sweet
jewel-like pastimes of Gauräìga Candra, He joyfully said to Muräri, "Verily, because
you always render service with devotion to Lord Räma Candra, therefore this jewellike book has been revealed to you. It is certainly for this reason.

çré-rämo gaura iha jagati präduräséd yato 'sau
granthenaitena janayati hi prema-mädhuryya-säram

çrutvä sarvve parama-rasikä prema-pürëäntaräç ca
gäyantas ta parama-sukha-da mokñam eväkñipanti 26

çré-räma - the Lord's avatära in the age of Treta as the ideal king; gaura - the
Golden Lord; iha - in this age; jagati - in the universe; präduräsét - He has
manifested; yata - through which; asau - He; granthena - by the book; etena this; janayati - He generates; hi - surely; prema-mädhurya-säram - the essential
sweetness of love; çrutvä - hearing; sarve - all; parama-rasikä - supreme
connoisseurs of rasa; prema-pürëa-antarä - hearts full of love; ca - and; gäyanta celebrate in song; tam - Him; parama-sukha-dam - the bestower of the ultimate
happiness; mokñam - liberation; eva - certainly; äkñipanti - they cast down.
"Çré Rama has displayed His original form as Gaura within this world, and through
this book He surely distributes the luscious juice of prema-rasa. All those who listen
attentively to it become consummate rasikas, and their hearts swell with prema.
They celebrate in song the qualities of the son of Çacé, the munificent donor of the
highest happiness, and they thus deride even the idea of liberation."

çréväsa-paëita präha / prema-gadgadayä girä
grantham äsvädya harñeëa / muräri paramotsuka 27
çréväsa-paëita - the pure devotee; präha - declared; prema-gadgadayä - with
voice faltering out of love; girä - with words; grantham - the book; äsvädya having relished; harñeëa - out of jubilation; murärim - Muräri Gupta; paramautsuka - very eager.

[p.739]
Çréväsa Paëita became very happy after relishing this book, and he spoke
falteringly with loving eagerness to Muräri as follows:

tvam eva jagatä bandha-mokñäya kåtavän hare
lélä bhagavato grantha / çrutvä mucyej jano bhayät 28
tvam - you; eva - surely; jagatäm - of the worlds; bandha-mokñäya - freed from
bondage; kåtavän - done; hare - of Hari; léläm - pleasure-pastimes; bhagavata - of
the Lord; grantham - book; çrutvä - hearing; mucyet - he can be liberated; jana a person; bhayät - from fear.
"Surely by writing this book you have liberated all the worlds from bondage, for by
hearing this book delineate the pleasure-pastimes of the all-opulent Personality of
Godhead, a person experiences liberation from all fear."

eva bhakta-gaëä sarvve / grantha-varëanam adbhutam
çrutvä muräri sanamya / prähu tasya kathä mitha 29
evam - so; bhakta-gaëä - the assembly of devotees; sarve - all; granthavarëanam - of the book-narrative; adbhutam - wonderful; çrutvä - hearing;
murärim - to Muräri Gupta; sanamya - bowing down fully; prähu - they said;
tasya - His; kathä - story; mitha - amongst one another.
In the same way, all of the bhaktas who heard the marvellous recitation of this
book offered respectful obeisances unto Muräri Gupta. They discussed amongst
themselves the topics of Mahäprabhu.

so 'pi praëamya vidhivan murärir / dhåtvä tu teñä caraëäravindam
premnä jaya kåñëa-caitanya-räma / iti bruvann nåtyati roravéti 30
sa api - he also; praëamya - bowing down; vidhivat - according to the
etiquette; muräri; dhåtvä - holding; tu - indeed; teñäm - their; caraëa-aravindam lotus feet; premnä - out of love; jaya - glories!; kåñëa-caitanya-rama; iti - thus;

[p.740]
bruvan - uttering; nåtyati - he dances; roravéti - He roared very loudly.
Muräri Gupta also bowed down to them, as is the proper vaiñëava etiquette. Out
of love, he held onto their lotus feet while uttering, "Jaya Kåñëa Caitanya Räma!"
and then he danced, roaring very loudly.

anyo 'nyam äliìgya çré-gaura-candra- / rasena pürëä kila te
babhüvu
çré-patir ekena jagad-dhitäya / prakäçya lélä surahasyäm etäm 31
anya anyam - each other; äliìgya - embracing; çré-gaura-candra - of Çré Gaura
Candra; rasena - by the mellow; pürëä - filled; kila - indeed; te - they; babhüvu were; çré-pati - the husband of Lakñmé; ekena - by one; jagat-hitäya - for the
welfare of the people of the universe; prakäçya - revealed; léläm - the pastimes;
su-rahasyäm - very confidential; etäm - this.
Embracing one another in this way, everyone become saturated with the mellows
of Çré Gaura Candra. Thus through the agency of this one soul, the husband of
Lakñmé has revealed His most confidential pastimes for the welfare of the world's
people.

catur-daça-çatäbdänte / païca-triçati-vatsare
äñäha-sita-saptamyä / grantho 'ya pürëatä gata 32
catu-daça-çata-abda - of the fourteen hundredth year; ante - at the end; païcatriçati-vatsare - on the fifty-third year; äñäha - of the month of _ñäha (JuneJuly); asita - in the dark fortnight; saptamyäm - on the seventh day; grantha book; ayam - this; pürëatäm - completion; gata - went.
In the year fourteen hundred and fifty-three of the Çäka era, on the seventh day of
the bright fortnight of the month of _ñäha, this book attained completion.

Thus ends the Twenty-sixth and last Sarga entitled "Mahäprabhu Visits
Våndävana and Returns to Néläcala to Forever Enter Çré Çré Rädhä-Kåñëa's

[p.741]
Transcendental Loving Affairs," in the Fourth Prakrama of the great poem Çré
Caitanya Carita, composed by Çréman Muräri Gupta Mahäçaya.

* * *