[p.1]
NAROTTAMA VILASA
By Narahari dasa
Translated by Dravida Dasa
THE FIRST VILASA
Oh! Supreme Lord Visvambhara, You are the husband of the goddess of fortune,
and my eternal friend. Only You are capable of distributing the wealth of love
of Godhead. You are known as kindhearted to those who depend upon You,
therefore, oh Lord, please shower You kindness upon me.
I worship Sri Lokanatha Prabhu, who is fully surrendered to the lotus feet of
Sri Sri Radha Vinode. He is the life of the devotees, and a confidential
associate of Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
I worship Narottama dasa Thakura, who is especially dear to Lord Gauranga. Like
a honey bee anxious for the nectar, he hovers at the lotus feet of Srila
Lokanatha, absorbed in love for Radha Krsna.
I worship the disciples of Srila Narottama Prabhu who are rich in good qualities
and are able to destroy all misfortune and misery.
For the pleasure of the Vaisnavas and to fulfill my own ardent desires, I am
writing this book Narottama Vilasa which briefly describes the glories of Srila
Narottama dasa Thakura.
All glories to the son of Saci and Jagannatha Misra, Sri Gaura Govinda, the
embodiment of divine love. He is the life of Nityananda and Advaita, and the
only love of Svarupa, Sanatana, Rupa, and Gopala. Lord Visvambhara, who is
expert at pleasing everyone, has bound the hearts of Haridasa, Vakresvara, and
Narahari with the ropes of His love, and won the friendship of Gauridasa and
Gadadhara.
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu and all His associates.
Oh listeners! please be kind upon me. I am an illiterate fool who knows nothing
of right or wrong, yet I have been ordered by saintly persons to narrate this
beautiful book Narottama Vilasa which will certainly be relished by the readers.
I have offered my obeisances to the Lord in the above verses, now listen
patiently and attentively as I briefly describe the glories of Sri Lokanatha
Prabhu, a favorite devotee of the Lord and the light of his famous brahmana
family.
He was born to Sita and Padmanabha Cakravarti in the village of Talagari in the
district of Jassora. It is difficult to describe the wonderful attributes of
Lokanatha's father and mother. Padmanabha was a famous Rarhi brahmana Vaisnava
and a favorite of Sri Advaita Prabhu. He was constantly absorbed in sankirtana,
singing madly and crying incessantly. Those who simply observed his kirtana
were also unable to check their tears.
He frequently came to Nadia for darsana of Lord Gauranga. However, after such
visits upon returning to his own village he inevitably fell into the depths of
despair due to intense feelings of separation from Gauranga.
He and his wife always sang the glories of Gauracandra. Sita was like her
husband. She was a devoted Vaisnavi and wife. She felt extremely fortunate to
have a wonderful son like Lokanatha and her happiness knew no bounds as she
watched his devotion to Gauracandra blossoming day by day. Who can describe the
loving care she showered upon her exalted son?

[p.2]
Lokanatha was always enthusiastically engaged in the Lord's devotional service.
People were spontaneously drawn by his extraordinary beauty and deep devotion.
He conscientiously served his parents, and was well-versed in all of the
scriptures at a very young age.
When his parents died, Lokanatha decided, after discussing with his friends,
that he would give up the shackles of material existence, go to Nadia and
surrender at the lotus feet of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
The mercy of the Lord was abundantly showered upon Lokanatha during his stay in
Nadia. However, after sometime Lord Caitanya requested that he go to Vraja.
Lokanatha could understand the mind of the Lord, he knew that Mahaprabhu was
thinking of taking sannyasa shortly. Thus Lokanatha's departure was an
indescribably pathetic scene; leaving the Lord's association was unbearable for
him. Completely despondent, Lokanatha began his journey. Crying incessantly,
the path before him became practically invisible, thus in five days he walked
a distance which would normally be covered in a single day. After traveling for
sometime he received the heart breaking news that Mahaprabhu had taken sannyasa
and, after consoling his associates, had gone to Nilacala. Lokanatha lamented,
knowing the Lord had given up His beautiful curling hair.
Heavy-hearted and forlorn, Lokanatha continued his journey only because it was
the order of the Lord. He arrived in Vrndavana practically lifeless, but the
charming atmosphere of Vraja soothed his mind and eased his aching heart.
However, after a few days Lokanatha heard that Mahaprabhu had gone to South
India, and his mind became disturbed. Eager to see the Lord again, Lokanatha
left for the south at once. In anxious anticipation he traveled quickly.
However, after traveling a considerable distance he received news that the Lord
had already left the South and returned to Nilacala [unclear]
Afterwards he heard that the Lord had arrived in Vrndavana. With great anxiety
Lokanatha immediately started for Vraja. However, upon reaching Vrndavana, he
found that Mahaprabhu had departed for Prayaga just a few days before.
The forlorn Lokanatha sank into the depths of despair. The next morning he
decided to follow Mahaprabhu to Prayaga. He could no longer tolerate the
intense misery of separation from his beloved Lord. Rolling on the ground he
cried pitifully until at last he feel asleep. In his dream he finally received
the long awaited darsana of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu; His effulgent body was
covered with yellow sandalwood paste, shining with a brilliance unknown to
gold. Perfectly arranged hair, decorated with fresh flowers, surrounded His
exquisite face, and His forehead was neatly marked with tilak. Who would not be
captivated by His gorgeous lotus eyes, majestic eyebrows, and enticing smile
which easily defeated the beauty of the moon? A sacred thread was draped across
His broad chest and His long arms touched His knees. His dhoti was folded in
three places and His transcendental body was bedecked with ornaments.
He spoke affectionately to Lokanatha: "I shall always be with you, relishing
loving pastimes, here in My eternal abode, Navadvipa. Even great personalities
like Lord Brahma are unable to understand this Dhama of Mine." Saying this, He
embraced Lokanatha and disappeared.
Lokanatha awoke, the emptiness in the Lord's absence was intolerable and he was
overwhelmed with despair. However, by Mahaprabhu's kindness, sleep once again
overtook him and the Lord, dressed in the garb of a sannyasi, once again
appeared before him. "You are thinking of going to Prayaga," the Lord said
sweetly, "But what is the use of going there when you can see me here in your
dream. Oh Lokanatha I also desire to be with all of you in Vrndavana. After I
sent you to Vraja I took sannyasa from Kesava Bharati. At that time I was very
eager to see Vrnda Vipina, but My devotees were so broken-hearted and desolate,
due to my acceptance of the renounced order, that I was obliged to spend a few
days in the house of Advaita Prabhu to console them. Afterwards I went to

[p.3]
Nilacala, then later to the South. Unfortunately our paths did not cross either
in the South or in Vrndavana. I know you are feeling despondent because of this
and have decided to leave for Prayaga tomorrow morning, but don't leave
Vrndavana, remember that I am always with you. I shall keep you informed of my
whereabouts. From Prayaga I'll leave for Nilacala, there I will tell my dear
devotees Rupa and Sanatana about you and they will meet you in Vrndavana soon.
In their association you will float on the waves of happiness amidst the ocean
of ecstatic love for Krsna."
"Within a short period of time a prince named Narottama will become your
disciple. He will be a gifted devotee, full of love and devotion, and empowered
to save the fallen conditioned souls from hellish life. His enchanting beautiful
kirtana will melt even wood or stone." Thus speaking He embraced Lokanatha, who
fell at the Lord's feet.
Awaking and finding himself alone, Lokanatha cried pitifully, remembering the
beautiful Gaurangacandra. Eventually he pacified himself, but tears continued
to flow like rivers from his eyes. As dawn approached he performed his daily
duties and sat down in a quiet place to chant the holy name of the Lord until
a local brahmana offered him some fruits to eat. He sat under the tree for
a long time until restlessness overtook him and he began wandering aimlessly
throughout Vrndavana. Eventually he happened upon a beautiful secluded area
where he stayed alone for a long time.
Later he happened to find out that Sri Subuddhi Misra had visited Vrndavana,
followed by Sri Rupa Gosvami a bit later, but now they were both on there way
to meet Sri Gaurasundara. Sanatana had also come to Vrndavana but had recently
left for Nilacala. Hearing this Lokanatha could not suppress his disappointment.
Sighing heavily and crying pitifully, he lamented, "Oh Rupa, Sanatana, when will
I be able to live with you?" Suddenly a voice replied: "We shall definitely come
to Vrndavana soon."
Eventually Gopala Bhatta and others did come to Vrndavana. I am lost for words
to describe that joyous meeting and the immense pleasure they derived from each
other's association. Sri Rupa Gosvami greeted Lokanatha with great warmth and
affection, dissipating the anguish of long separation from the Lord and His
devotees.
In Sanatana Gosvami's Vaisnava Tosani he mentions his attachment for Lokanatha:
"I worship Srila Kasisvara, Lokanatha, and Sri Krsnadasa who have taken shelter
at the lotus feet of the dear-most Deity in Vrndavana, Srila Govinda Deva."
Raghunatha Bhatta, Gopala Bhatta, Bhugarbha Gosvami, as well as many others,
dearly loved Lokanatha. Together they spent many wonderful days in Sri Vrndavana
Dhama relishing the highest pinnacles of devotional happiness. Lokanatha was
fully engaged in the service of his worshipful Deities, Sri Sri Radha Vinode.
How he obtained these deities I have explained in Bhakti-ratnakara (page 23).
Once while serving his Deities, Lokanatha suddenly saw the madhurya rupa** of
Sri Gaura amalgamated with that of Sri Radha Vinode. Later, in a dream, the Lord
** revealed everything regarding His own transcendental nature. Such deep
spiritual realizations gave rise to intense emotions, thus whenever Lokanatha
tried to describe the divine attributes of the Lord, he would lose his composure
and simply roll on the ground, cursing himself for not having personally
witnessed the Lord's pastimes.
Krsnadasa Kaviraja requested Lokanatha's permission for writing Caitanya
Caritamrta, which he received with Lokanatha's wholehearted enthusiasm, yet
both he and Gopala Bhatta, forbade Krsnadasa from mentioning their names within
the book.
I have heard all of these stories from some aged persons?? Whoever hears them
is extremely fortunate. The merciful Lokanatha Gosvami remained in Vrndavana
and later showered his blessings upon his dear disciple, Narottama dasa. By the

[p.4]
mercy of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Lokanatha obtained the precious gem of love
of Godhead:
"I worship the lotus feet of Lokanatha Prabhu whose is opulent with the wealth
of Sri Krsna Caitanya's blessings, and whose mind is bedecked with the ornaments
of love."
"I take shelter at the lotus feet of Lokanatha Prabhu who eternally resides in
Vrndavana. He is always absorbed in loving devotional service, enchanted by the
transcendental pastimes of Sri Krsna. "
"I take refuge at the lotus feet of Lokanatha Prabhu who is completely
indifferent to the pains and pleasures of this material world. His mercy was
fully realized only by the great scholar Narottama dasa."
All glories to Narottama dasa Thakura, the beloved disciple of Lokanatha
Gosvami.
How the illustrious Narottama took his birth in the house of Krsnananda Datta,
the elder brother of Sri Purusottama, I dare not discuss elaborately here.
However, for your pleasure, I shall give a brief description.
Rupa and Sanatana lived in Ramakeli, a beautiful village in a pleasant area of
Gaudadesh. Although acting as high ranking ministers in the court of the king,
they were always absorbed in discussing scriptures with scholars and professors.
Their genius and wisdom won them fame throughout the world. In the courts of
Maharastra, Karnataka, Dravida, Tailanga, Utkala, Mithila, Gaura, Gujarata,
Vanga, Kasi and Kashmir they were considered the greatest scholars. (I have
explained this further in Bhakti-ratnakara). Being favorites of the king, the
brothers had no shortage of wealth.
Meanwhile, Sri Gauracandra was performing His all-attractive pastimes in
Navadvipa. Rupa and Sanatana happened to hear reports of the Lord's activities
and were spontaneously attracted. Immediately they began writing numerous
letters to Mahaprabhu, while earnestly waiting for the opportunity to meet Him
personally.
The Supreme Lord, who is bound only by the love of His devotees, soon also
became anxious to meet Rupa and Sanatana. After accepting sannyasa, the Lord
consoled his devotees, went to Nilacala and later to Vrndavana. When Mahaprabhu
started for Gaudadesh millions of people ran behind him, thus He arrived at
Ramakeli surrounded by hoards of devotees.
On hearing of Lord Caitanya's arrival, Sanatana and Rupa, as well as Kesava
Chatri and other friends, were overwhelmed with joy. The royal ministers, Rupa
and Sanatana, could not contain their happiness and secretly rushed to meet the
associates of Lord Caitanya. By the grace of Nityananda Prabhu they were
introduced to Sri Krsna Caitanya. Who can describe the intense emotions of Rupa
and Sanatana at that meeting? Sri Gauracandra happily welcomed them with sweet
words, as Nityananda Prabhu, Haridasa, Vakresvara, Mukunda and others stood by
watching with pleasure.
Mahaprabhu stayed there for a few days constantly surrounded by an ocean of
ecstatic devotees who were eager to bath in the purifying waters of the Lord's
transcendental association. Not only the general mass of people were affected
by the Lord, even the Yavana king was moved by Mahaprabhu's presence.
One day while Caitanya Mahaprabhu was dancing with his associates during
sankirtana, He suddenly looked in the direction of Sri Kheturi village.
A peculiar look appeared on His face, tears whelmed up in His eyes, and He
cried out the name "Narottama! Narottama!" again and again. The ocean of mercy,
Nityananda Raya shouted in joy, and Haridasa, Vakresvara, and others were

[p.5]
inexplicable filled with happiness.
Witnessing the unusual behavior of the Lord, the devotees began talking amongst
themselves: "Prabhu is repeatedly calling out the name of someone called
Narottama."
"It seems that this Narottama is extremely dear to the Lord, perhaps he is
about to take birth soon."
"Oh who is that fortunate man who will have such a son?"
"The woman who bears him within her womb is the most fortunate lady in the
world."
"Obviously, the Lord has plans for this Narottama to fulfill His mission."
In this way the rumors of the appearance of Narottama spread far and wide.
A similar event took place again when Mahaprabhu was traveling to Nilacala,
suddenly he cried out the name of Srinivasa. [unclear]
These topics became known to all and everyone waited eagerly anticipating the
appearance of Narottama.
Oh listeners please hear attentively as Narahari dasa narrates Narottama Vilasa.

[p.6]
THE SECOND VILASA
All glories to Sri Gauracandra, Nityananda Prabhu, and all the devotees of
Mahaprabhu. Please bestow your mercy upon this poor fallen conditioned soul.
All glories to those who hear the nectar of this Narottama Vilasa, kindly
listen patiently to my narration.
The wheel of time turned, until finally, on the sixth hour of the full moon day
in the month of Magha, when all auspicious signs were visible, Narottama dasa
took birth to fulfill the mission of the Lord.
His mother, radiant with beauty, wept joyfully as she lovingly gazed at the
charming face of her son. An unearthly effulgence suddenly illuminated the
entire delivery room and happiness swelled in the hearts of everyone present.
From that moment the village of Sri Kheturi became an auspicious place. The
residents suddenly felt purified; as if cleansed of all misgivings. They
trembled with ecstatic emotions, tears filled their eyes, and they spontaneously
chanted the holy name with devotion. They rushed to the house of Krsnananda
carrying all kinds of gifts for the newborn child.
The delighted Datta Mahasaya warmly welcomed them all without taking his eyes
off the face of his son for a second, while Krsnananda's exalted father
distributed charity profusely to the singers, musicians and others present, for
the protection of his grandson.
There was no woman in the world as fortunate as Narottama's mother, Narayani.
By the Lord's grace she was granted the eyes to see Gauranga, Nityananda, and
Advaita dancing ecstatically within her own home.
Narayani watched jubilantly as her son began to grow like the moon. Similarly,
Krsnananda's pleasure knew no bounds as he constantly stared at the jewel-like
face of his son. Grateful for his good fortune, he fed the brahmanas daily.
At the appropriate time on an auspicious day, Krsnananda arranged for the
ceremony of offering rice to his son. The astrologer present on that joyful
occasion noted all the auspicious signs upon the child's body and predicted
that the boy would be an illustrious person: "This baby will be the greatest of
men, therefore he should be called Narottama."
The festivities went on happily until Krsnananda tried to feed his son the rice.
To everyone's dismay the child refused to eat. Although they coaxed him again
and again, the boy repeatedly turned his head away, refusing to eat. The festive
atmosphere was replaced with anxiety and everyone looked at each other
nervously, not knowing what to do.
The thoughtful astrologer, however, reassured everyone, "Don't worry, this baby
will not accept food unless it has first been offered to Lord Visnu."
Thus the rice was offered to Lord Visnu, then again offered to the child. To
everyone's relief, the child happily devoured it. From that day on, realizing
the value of prasada, the king ordered: "Only food which has been offered to
Krsna should be given to my son." Although the worship of Krsna was customary
in their family, from the time of Narottama's birth everyone became much more
attentive to the service of the Lord.
After a few years Narottama began his studies and soon proved to be a genius.
Within a short time he became a scholar in all subjects. The teachers use to
comment: "How is it possible that this boy can learn so quickly? Do you think
he is an incarnation of God?"
He was an adorable boy and endeared himself to everyone, soon he was the talk
of the town: "Just one glance at Narottama is sufficient to cool my mind and

[p.7]
chase away all miseries."
"From every angle of vision the prince is beautiful."
"I have never seen such a gorgeous boy."
In this way Krsnananda's son was glorified throughout the town.
Krsnananda was happy simply to gaze upon his son, but as time passed he began
to think, "My son is capable in all respects, he must be married soon. I am
getting old and should follow the path of my father, it is time to be relieved
of my kingly duties." Thus he consulted with the wise Kayasthas to find
a suitable bride for his son.
Meanwhile Narottama was lost in the ecstacy of love for Krsna. With eyes full
of tears he joyfully worshipped his Lord privately, oblivious to everything
else. In this way he lost all taste for mundane pleasures and could not bear to
even hear topics related to royal pleasures and properties. Aware of their
son's growing apathy for material life, Krsnananda and Narayani were filled
with anxiety and could think of nothing else. Finally they decided to appoint
someone to constantly watch over their son, but still they were unable to find
peace of mind.
Narottama's home became a prison for him and he longed to be free. Although he
said nothing, he was constantly waiting for the opportunity to leave home.
Everyday he secretly pleaded desperately for the Lord's help. His body became
covered with dust as he rolled on the ground crying. Raising his arms in the
air he begged pitifully, "Oh Gauranga! Nitai! Advaita! My Lords, please save me
from this hell."
At that time the news of Lord Gauranga's glories was spreading throughout the
world. Narottama's only solace was when he received some word of the Lord's
pastimes. There was one aged brahmana in Sri Kheturi named Krsnadasa. He was
a genuine servant of Lord Krsna and loved Narottama deeply. He could not let
a single day pass without seeing Narottama. That brahmana, Krsnadasa, was so
powerful by dint of his devotion, that no one dare disobey him.
Everyday after completing his worship of Krsna, Krsnadasa would visit Narottama.
Narottama welcomed him with wholehearted enthusiasm, humbly falling prostrate at
his feet. Offering him a seat, he would then eagerly enquiring about Lord
Caitanya and His associates. Krsnadasa happily narrated the pastimes of the Lord
in three parts (Adi, Madhya and Antya). He went on to glorify the transcendental
activities of Nityananda and Advaita with such emotion then even wood or stone
would melt upon hearing his devotional narration. He explained the life
histories of Pandita Gadadhara, Pandita Srivasa, Vakresvara, Svarupa, Murari,
Haridasa, Narahari Dasa, Gauridasa, Gadadhara, Vasu Ghosh, Mukunda, Sanjaya,
Damodara, Kasisvara, Sri Paramananda Bhattacarya, Krsnadasa brahmacari,
Lokanatha Varya, Sanatana, Rupa, Sri Gopala, Raghunatha, Raghunatha Bhatta, Sri
Jiva, Subuddhi Misra, Raghava, Krsna Pandita and others.
He then narrated the story of Srinivasa Acarya's birth. Krsnadasa took hold of
Narottama's hands and tearfully said, "Oh Narottama, how can I describe the
wonderful qualities of Srinivasa? In his youth he was renowned as a great
scholar and the embodiment of love and devotion. When he left for Nilacala to
meet Sri Caitanya, along the way he received the stunning news that the Lord
had disappeared from this world. He was devastated and immediately fell
unconscious. Only due to the wish of the Lord did life remain within his body."
The glories of the Lord's devotees are described by Kavi Karnapura in
Gunalesasucakam: "Glory to Srila Srinivasa Prabhu, the embodiment of mercy, who
was born in a Rarhi brahmin family in Ghantesvari. In his childhood he conquered
the world by his scholastic genius. Upon hearing about Lord Caitanya, Srinivasa
rushed to Nilacala to see the Lord."
"Glory to Srinivasa Prabhu who fell unconscious on the road to Nilacala upon

[p.8]
hearing of Sri Mahaprabhu's disappearance. After regaining consciousness he
frantically cut his own beautiful hair and so doing hurt his forehead, then he
continued on to Purusottama remembering the lotus feet of Mahaprabhu."
In a dream Lord Caitanya appeared before Srinivasa, encouraging him to go on to
Nilacala. Upon seeing Srinivasa, everyone there shed tears. Gadadhara,
Vakresvara Pandita and others welcomed him into their association. Showering
their mercy upon him they ordered him to go to Vrndavana. Srinivasa first took
darsana of Sri Jagannatha and then started for Gauda via Srikhanda. After
reaching Gauda he again returned to Nilacala via Srikhanda, but along the way
he heard that Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami had disappeared from the world.
Devastated, Srinivasa turned around and headed back towards Gauda, looking like
a man on the verge of death. After traveling sometime he lay down and fell
asleep. In his dream Sri Pandita Gosvami appeared before Srinivasa and lovingly
consoled him.
When he awoke in the morning his mind was still extremely perturbed, yet he
continued on towards Gauda. Along the road he met one of the residents of Gauda
who informed Srinivasa about the disappearances of Prabhu Nityananda and
Advaita. Again, Srinivasa fell unconscious in despair. When he came back to
consciousness he immediately decided to commit suicide and began building
a fire to throw himself into. However, Nityananda and Advaita Prabhu suddenly
appeared before Srinivasa. They quickly pacified him and ordered him to go to
Vrndavana.
In the morning Srinivasa continued on to Gauda. In Srikhanda he met Narahari
and Sri Raghunandana and bowed to their feet. This is described by Kavi
Karnapura in Gunalesasucakam: "All glory to Srila Srinivasa Prabhu who went to
Srikhanda and bowed before Narahari Sarkara Thakura, the dear-most associate of
Sri Caitanya Candra. Being ordered by Narahari, Srinivasa also sought the favor
of Yadunandana."
When Srinivasa arrived in Navadvipa he was overwhelmed with astonishment to see
the Supreme Lord Gauranga and His associates sporting happily there. Srinivasa
had been granted the eyes to see this wonderful scene. Actually everyone in
Navadvipa was floating in an ocean of sorrow. Srinivasa eagerly went to the
house of Prabhu where Visnupriya Devi bestowed her mercy upon him. Dasa
Gadadhara, Srivasa and others also welcomed Srinivasa with tears of love in
their eyes. From there, Srinivasa went to Santipura to see Sita Devi. Who can
describe the loving reception he received from her? In ecstatic trance he
traveled on to Khardaha, there Sri Jahnava and Vasudha greeted him with great
affection. He then went to Khanakula to receive the blessings of Sri Abhirama
and his wife Malini devi. He then returned to Srikhanda and met Sri Narahari
Thakura who bestowed his mercy upon him and again advised him to go to Vraja.
With great affection Sri Raghunandana gave Srinivasa complete instructions for
his journey to Vrndavana. Srinivasa went back to Yajigrama to visit his mother
and after consoling her, started off alone for Vrajapura."
After hearing this story, spontaneous love for Srinivasa arose within the heart
of Narottama. Floating in a river of tears Narottama thought, "When shall I get
the company of Srinivasa?" Who can understand Narottama's state of mind? Daily
he listened attentively to the stories of Prabhu and his devotees, and cursed
himself for not having attained their association. His mind was always
disturbed, he could not eat, nor could he sleep at night.
One day, due to the desire of the Lord, Narottama fell asleep and in his dream
he saw Gauraraya. His splendid beauty could not be compared to gold, lightning,
or anything else of this world. The beautiful curling hair hanging down His
back could turn the mind of even the most virtuous woman. His earrings shone
brightly and His lotus eyes were the trap of Cupid. His smiling face could
easily defeat the effulgence of the moon, and the beautiful tilak on His

[p.9]
forehead could capture one's breath. His graceful hands swept down to His knees,
and how broad His chest was. Beautiful jewelled garlands hung around His
conch-like neck, and His deep navel was finely shaped. His thin waist defeated
even the lion. His knees looked like toppled banana trees, and His feet were
more attractive than lotuses. How gorgeous was His three fold loin cloth.
Observing the beauty of Prabhu, Narottama shed tears of love and fell on the
feet of the Lord. Placing His feet on Narottama's head, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu
said sweetly, "Oh, Narottama, look at me. I cannot bear your tears. Don't
worry, go straight to Vrndavana. There you will be initiated by my dear devotee
Lokanatha. He will happily pour the nectar of the Mahamantra into your ears. I
have many plans which are to be served by you." Narottama's sleep was then
broken.
Narottama could not bear Prabhu's disappearance and he rolled on the ground in
disappointment. Thus again, due to the Lord's wish, Narottama fell asleep. In
his dream he saw Lord Caitanya on the bank of the Ganges in Navadvipa. He was
enjoying His pastimes along with Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara, Srivasa,
Svarupa, Narahari, Haridasa, Vakresvara, Mukunda, Murari, Govinda, Madhava,
Vasu Ghosh, Suklambara, Gauridasa, Sri Sanjaya, Damodara, Mahesa, Sankara, and
Yadu Acarya. All of them surrounded Gauranga as they engaged in sankirtana,
while the people of Navadvipa witnessed their divine pastimes. Eager to inspect
this beautiful scene, even Brahma, Siva and other demigods and goddesses
mingled with the crowd in disguise. Even the animals and birds were charmed.
Those who were born blind, were suddenly able to see and rushed to observe the
extraordinary sankirtana performance. Seeing this wonderful fun, Narottama wept
with joy. On seeing Narottama, Prabhu Gauracandra emotionally took him to His
bosom and soaked Narottama with His tears. Narottama fell on Prabhu's feet, and
the Lord affectionately lifted him from the ground and put him in the care of
Nityananda and Advaita. He also helped Narottama to obtain the mercy of His
associates, and they all advised Narottama to go to Vrndavana. Narottama was
unable to control his emotions. Observing the beauty of Nityananda, Narottama
fell on His feet, and Nityananda put His feet on Narottama's head, blessing him
with unconditional love for Sri Gauranga, then advised him to go to Vrndavana.
Upon seeing the beauty of Advaita, Narottama fell at his feet, who at once
lifted Narottama and placed him at the lotus feet of Gauranga. He bowed to the
feet of Gadadhara, Srivasa and others who also embraced Narottama one by one.
Narottama bathed in the tears of everyone. All of them encouraged Narottama to
go to Vrndavana. Narottama then woke up and it was morning. He consoled himself
and finished his daily morning duties. He wept with joy as he began to see many
auspicious signs, indicating good fortune. In anticipation he waited, hoping
that the fortunate moment would soon arise.
Shortly thereafter, Narottama's father and his men went to Gauda for business.
Narottama seized the opportunity. He somehow managed to trick his mother, then
he deceived the guard watching over him and quickly left his home secretly. In
fear of being caught, Narottama did not visit Navadvipa, but started towards
Vrndavana through the woods. He disguised himself in such a way that no one
could identify him. For fifteen days he ran at random, then heaved a sigh of
relief.
The miserable condition of Narottama's parents was beyond description. Narottama
became the talk of Gauda, "Prince Narottama must have gone to Vrajapura."
"He must be the Narottama whom Prabhu had called for in Ramakeli village."
"The strength of mind he has manifested is not known to an ordinary man."
In this way Narottama became very popular in that town. Nityananda, Advaita and
other favorite associates of Sri Caitanya always thought of Narottama's well
being. It is said that he who was fortunate enough to have seen Narottama could
forget his fear of material life.
Narottama undauntedly passed through the main roads now. Who can describe

[p.10]
Narottama's sincere efforts in the service of the Lord? Traveling along the
road he sang the glories of Gauranga with continuous streams of tears rolling
down his face. Those who just once looked upon the face of Narottama, attained
peace of mind. The villages which Narottama selected to halt at each night
became blessed by his presence. Whether male or female, anyone who kept company
with Narottama during his journey would comment softly amongst themselves about
the wonderful characteristics of Narottama: "Even the golden campaka flower
would become ashamed to see the beautiful color of this young man's
complexion."
"Look at his beautiful face and big eyes. How superb his nose, cheeks,
eyebrows, forehead and ears are."
Some one else said, "Look how long his hands are and how broad his chest is."
"Who are the fortunate parents of this extraordinary man with such beautiful
knees and feet?"
Some one said, "He cannot be an ordinary human being. He must be a demigod or
a son of a king."
Another person remarked, "Alas, how sad it is that such a young man has become
apathetic toward family life."
Others said, "We wonder how his parents are living without him."
"Fie to providence, who has no mercy for this boy and has dragged him out of
his family at such an young age."
Being extremely moved by Narottama's presence, no one wanted to return to their
houses. They brought many things for Narottama to eat and offered him
a comfortable bed to sleep on. But Narottama could not eat or sleep, he spent
the night in sankirtana. Everyone felt sad to see the body of Narottama smeared
with dust. In the morning the villagers did not want to let him go, but
Narottama begged their leave. This was the normal scene which occurred daily
along his journey to Vraja. Narottama stole the hearts of everyone he met.
Within a short time Narottama visited all the holy places and at last, with an
enchanted mind, entered Vrndavana. First of all he went to visit Visrama Ghat
in Sri Mathura, where he bathed in the Yamuna and took some rest. In the
solitude of the night he began kirtana there. At that time a great vaisnava
resident of Mathura came there carrying many varieties of Krsna prasada and
affectionately fed Narottama. Narottama asked him about the well being of
Vraja. With a pierced heart the brahmana informed him of the demise of
Raghunatha, Kasisvara, Rupa and Sanatana. On hearing of the disappearance of
Rupa and Sanatana, Narottama fell on the ground crying. Striking his head on
the ground he called out, "Kasisvara Pandita, Sri Bhatta Raghunatha." Tears
streamed from his eyes like a river and he was about to faint. Seeing the
death-like state of Narottama, the brahmana took him in his lap and consoled
him. They spent most of the night together discussing many topics. Late at
night, due to the will of the Lord, both of them fell asleep. In Narottama's
dream, Rupa, Sanatana, Kasisvara and Raghunatha appeared before Narottama.
Narottama at once fell on their feet. All of them embraced Narottama and soaked
him with their tears. They spoke sweetly to Narottama, some of which the
brahmana could hear. With great satisfaction they showered their blessings upon
Narottama and then disappeared.
Narottama was unable to tolerate their disappearance, he began to lament gazing
desperately in all directions. The brahmana was astonished to see Narottama's
condition. He hastily took Narottama in his lap and tearfully spoke sweetly to
him, thanking him for his purifying association. After considerable time the
brahmana's emotions cooled and he begged Narottama to come to his house in the
morning. Narottama bowed before the brahmana and requested him to let him go,
"Please be kind to me and let me go, for I am dying to see the feet of the
Gosvamis. Please be merciful and help me to fulfill my desires." With tears in
his eyes the brahmana affectionately took him in his lap and blessed him. He
accompanied Narottama for some distance but due to his old age could not walk
further. Thus he gave Narottama directions to reach Vrndavana and ordered one
man to assist Narottama in his journey. After Narottama's departure, the

[p.11]
brahmana, with a broken heart, stood staring at the path.
While walking Narottama began to think, "Caitanya Mahaprabhu has brought such
a low and unqualified man as me here to the sacred land of Vrndavana. He has
sent me to the abode of mercy, Sri Lokanatha Gosvami Prabhu. Will he accept me
as his servant? Will I be able to hold the lotus feet of Sri Gopala Bhatta, Sri
Bhugarbha Gosvami, Sri Jiva Gosvami and others on my head? Will they show their
mercy to a worthless man like me? Srinivasa Acarya who is the embodiment of
love, will he love a poor soul like me?" Thinking in this way his eyes filled
with tears, his body trembled uncontrollably and he was unable to walk a single
step further.
Meanwhile, on the same night that Narottama entered Vrndavana, Srinivasa
suddenly became overwhelmed with joy for no apparent reason. He took this as
a good sign and tears of love began to fall from his eyes as he thought, "I'm
probably going to meet a very dear friend." In eager anticipation he began
kirtana and continued on throughout the night. However, late into the night he
fell asleep. In his dream Sri Rupa Gosvami appeared before him saying, "Oh
Srinivasa, in the morning you will meet Narottama." Thus speaking, he
disappeared.
In the morning when Srinivasa awoke he rushed to meet Sri Jiva Gosvami and
revealed his dream. Sri Jiva Gosvami was very happy to hear the news, as he had
been in great anxiety waiting for Narottama's arrival. He told Srinivasa,
"Previously Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu told me about Narottama, and I have already
told you about him. This is that Narottama for whom we have been waiting for so
long." Saying this, Sri Jiva hurried off to the temple of Sri Govinda, and
Srinivasa happily returned to his house.
Suddenly a person approached Srinivasa and informed him, "A prince has come
from Gauda. He is a young man with beautiful features and his body is soaked
with tears. I cannot describe the wonderful emotions of that man after observing
the face of Sri Govinda. Crying incessantly, Sri Jiva Gosvami took him in his
lap and welcomed him with sweet words. He sent me to bring you to that place."
Hearing this, Srinivasa could not control his emotions and began running to the
temple of Govinda.
Srinivasa was overwhelmed to at last see Narottama. Like a poor man who has
gained a priceless gem, Srinivasa rushed to embrace Narottama. What Srinivasa
expressed to Narottama through his embrace, I am unable to describe. Nor can
I explain with one mouth how Narottama felt upon meeting Srinivasa. Everyone
began to whisper about the uncommon friendship between Srinivasa and Narottama.
They became such close friends that one could hardly differentiate one from the
other. Sri Govinda had at last fulfilled the desires of Narottama. Sri Krsna
Pandita, the head priest of Sri Govinda, brought the garlands worn by the Deity
for both of them. It should be noted that Sri Krsna Pandita was a great scholar
and intimate associate of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. After the demise of Kasisvara
Pandita, Sri Krsna Pandita became the head priest of Sri Govinda. Everyone knew
that Sri Krsna Pandita had great love for Narottama. Narottama humbly bowed to
the feet of Sri Krsna Pandita.
Sri Jiva Gosvami quickly took Narottama to the solitary hermitage of Sri
Lokanatha Gosvami. They found him alone in a secluded place where he had been
suffering the misery of separation from Rupa and Sanatana. Sri Jiva Gosvami
bowed to his feet and slowly told him about Narottama. Lokanatha had been
restlessly waiting for Narottama to come, now seeing Narottama before him,
Lokanatha began to float in an ocean of tears. Narottama fell at the feet of
his spiritual master, and Lokanatha placed his feet on Narottama's head. With
sweet words he assured Narottama that after a few days he would initiate him.
Again and again Lokanatha asked Sri Jiva, "Please help him to establish his
grasp of devotional books." To Srinivasa he affectionately said, "Always make
sure he is properly situated on the path of devotion". Thus speaking, Lokanatha

[p.12]
uttered the names of Rupa and Sanatana and extracted a heavy sigh. Observing
Gosvami, Sri Jiva was unable to check his tears. Sri Jiva took his leave and
left to take darsana of the lotus feet of Sri Radhavinoda.
Thereafter Sri Jiva Gosvami took Narottama to meet Gopala Bhatta Gosvami. He
was also sitting alone in a secluded place, cultivating the memories of Rupa
and Sanatana. I have no words to accurately depict the sweet relationship
between Sri Gopala Bhatta and Sri Sanatana Gosvami. This has been described in
one sloka: "I worship Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami whose heart is filled with love
for Sanatana and the friendship of Sri Rupa. He who worships them, is able to
obtain mercy of Sri Gopala Bhatta. I worship Sri Gopala Bhatta whose life and
soul is Sri Radharamana."
Sri Jiva Gosvami bowed to the feet of Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, who was very happy
to meet Narottama. Narottama fell at his feet and Gosvami at once showed him
great affection, warmly embracing Narottama and soaking his body with tears.
Sri Jiva and Narottama offered their obeisances and went for darsana of the
lotus feet of Sri Radharamana. They also went to the temples of Sri Govinda,
Gopinatha and Madanamohana.
While conversing together they entered the temple of Sri Gopinatha, and Sri
Jiva introduced Narottama to Sri Madhu Pandita. Narottama immediately touched
the lotus feet of Sri Pandita. Sri Pandita affectionately held Narottama to his
bosom and brought him to see Sri Radha Gopinatha. He gave the garland which had
decorated the Deity to Narottama.
Sri Jiva Gosvami then took Srinivasa and Narottama to the house of Sri
Bhugarbha Gosvami, a great scholar and inseparable associate of Sri Lokanatha
Gosvami. He always spent his days in remembrance of Mahaprabhu. Sri Jiva
Gosvami introduced him to Narottama, who at once touched the feet of Gosvami.
Bhugarbha Gosvami embraced him very lovingly. After bowing to his feet, Sri
Jiva returned to his house with Srinivasa and Narottama and brought them before
Sri Sri Radha Damodara. Narottama was overwhelmed with love at the sight of the
Deity. How can I describe Narottama's state of mind upon seeing the tomb of Sri
Rupa Gosvami? Tears streamed down his face as he rolled on the ground.
Gradually, his body became still and there was no sign of heaving. Srinivasa
quickly took him in his lap. Sri Jiva pacified him and took him to his cottage.
Sri Jiva then received a message to go quickly to Govindaji Temple. Thus he,
Srinivasa and Narottama went to the temple and observed the rajabhoga arati of
Sri Govinda. After respecting mahaprasada they returned to Sri Jiva's cottage.
There they spent time discussing topics related to Krsna. Later they went to
the temple of Sri Madanamohana and observed the uthvapana arati of the Deity.
Sri Jiva then introduced Narottama to everyone there. Seeing Sri Madanamohana,
Narottama became overwhelmed with love, forgetting himself he wept incessantly.
The Gosvami priest lovingly gave him the garland which had decorated the Deity.
Sri Jiva then took him to the tomb of Sanatana Gosvami. One mouth is incapable
of describing the emotions of Narottama upon observing Sanatana's tomb. With
great affection Sri Jiva pacified Narottama and brought him to his cottage.
There he put Narottama into the hands of his dear Srinivasa. With great
happiness Srinivasa bowed to the feet of Sri Jiva and started for his cottage
with Narottama, where they spent the entire night discussing topics related to
Krsna. In the morning, they bathed in the Yamuna and worshipped the Lord. With
joyful minds they went to see Sri Jiva Gosvami, who immediately sent them to
the Radha Kunda.
After observing the beauty of the two kunda's, they went to the place of Sri
dasa Gosvami and Srinivasa cautiously introduced Narottama to him. Though Dasa
Gosvami had been in a miserable state of mind due to separation from the Lord
and His devotees, he suddenly became very happy. "Where is Narottama"? Saying
this he opened his eyes. Narottama bowed to his lotus feet. Being affectionately
moved, Dasa Gosvami showered his mercy upon Narottama. Narottama was then

[p.13]
introduced to all the great scholars there. Sri Raghava Pandita, who had been
living at Govardhana, was extremely happy to see Narottama. Srinivasa and
Narottama finished their travels to all the sacred spots and then reported back
to Sri Jiva.
Without delay Sri Jiva happily began educating Narottama. During his studies
Narottama won the hearts of all with his sensitive and scholastic explanations.
Who can understand the heart of Narottama? His service attitude towards
Lokanatha Gosvami was beyond compare, and Lokanatha Gosvami was extremely
pleased with his beloved disciple. One day, observing Narottama's eagerness,
Lokanatha fulfilled Narottama's long cherished desire and initiated him into
the chanting of the Mahamantra. Everyone in Vrndavana was greatly impressed by
the depth of Narottama's understanding of devotional scriptures. Thus, to
everyone's pleasure, Sri Jiva Gosvami conferred upon Narottama the title of
`Sri Thakura Mahasaya.' All the mahantas were filled with joy and Narottama's
fame rapidly spread throughout Vrajapura. The practice of manasa seva in
Vrndavana was first started by Narottama (this episode has been described in
Bhakti-ratnakara.)
Please listen attentively as I describe how Narottama again returned to Gauda.
I, Narahari dasa continue the narration of Sri Narottama Vilasa.

[p.14]
THE THIRD VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda, Advaita Acarya and all the
devotees. Please bestow your mercy upon me. All glories to the listeners, who
are an ocean of mercy. Now listen attentively as I continue my narration.
After consulting with all the mahantas of Vraja, Sri Jiva Gosvami determined
an auspicious date for sending all of the Gosvami's manuscripts to Gauda. It
had previously been predicted by the Lord Himself that these books would be
distributed far and wide. Thus Sri Jiva handed over all the precious manuscripts
to Srinivasa Acarya, who was responsible for carrying them to Gauda. In this
regard Sri Thakura Mahasaya composed one famous sloka: "When shall I see the
abode of mercy, Sri Caitanya Deva who has distributed his power in two ways; He
invested Sri Rupa, and others, with the power to write devotional books wherein
priceless treasures of spiritual knowledge shine like brilliant jewels. And He
has empowered Srinivasa to circulate them. Thus I worship the lotus feet of Sri
Caitanya Deva who has manifested these two powerful mediums to shower His mercy
upon this world."
Sri Jiva Gosvami's knowledge and devotion was deeper than millions oceans.
Although his outward expression was most stable, inwardly he was extremely
emotional and greatly perturbed at the thought of separation from Narottama and
Srinivasa. Nevertheless, he calmly helped Srinivasa to say good-bye to everyone
and gave him his blessings to start for Gauda at an auspicious moment.
With great affection Lokanatha Gosvami handed over his dear disciple, Narottama,
to the hands of Srinivasa. Again and again he instructed Narottama, "Always
remember to serve the Deities and dedicate your life to spreading the sankirtana
movement." Narottama happily accepted these instructions as his life and soul,
and Srinivasa accepted the charge of Narottama jubilantly. Putting Syamananda
and Narottama under the care of Srinivasa, Sri Jiva said, "From now on, these
boys are yours." He ordered Syamananda , "First go to Gauda, then travel to
Utkala via Sri Amvika Puri." (This is elaborately described in Bhaktiratnakara). Thus taking the blessings of all the mahantas, they started their
long journey to Gauda. The carts filled with the priceless treasure of books
moved ahead and eleven armed guards from Vraja followed behind. With a disturbed
mind, Sri Jiva Gosvami accompanied the party to Mathura. The residents of
Mathura greeted them ecstatically and they rested there for the night. Their
departure the following morning, however, was a pathetic scene, no one could
bear to see them go.
After a long journey Srinivasa, Narottama and Syamananda finally reached
Gaudamandala and headed through the woods in the direction of Vanavisnupura. In
the midst of the forest they came upon a village were they decided to halt for
the night. Generally they were extremely cautious about protecting the books at
night. However, on this night, due the desire of the Lord, they all fell sound
asleep.
Meanwhile, the local king, Vira Hamvira, had received a report that many carts
filled with jewels, carried by a number of wealthy persons, had arrived in their
village. Hearing this, the enthusiastic king at once sent a team of dacoits to
rob them. The dacoits easily robbed the caskets and carried them to the king.
Without even opening the caskets the king suddenly became overwhelmed with awe
and bowed to the ground again and again. Bewildered, the king exclaimed, "Oh,
what has happened to me. What kind of jewels are in these caskets?" Saying this
the king began to weep inexplicably. In this way the goddess of devotion
transcendentally tricked the king. Feeling uncertain about the robbery, the king
secretly opened the caskets and found the books. Repentant, he cried out, "Alas,
what have I done? I don't know who the gentlemen are whom I have hurt. If I am
fortunate enough to meet them, I shall certainly seek their refuge and return
their books." Sitting alone in a secluded place the king lamented in this way.

[p.15]
In the morning when Srinivasa and his party awoke they were horrified to find
that the precious life-long works of the Gosvami's had been stolen by dacoits.
The miserable scene which then insued is to heart-breaking to describe.
Throwing themselves on the ground they cried out loudly in utter despair. They
were unable to pacify one another. A long time passed in heated lamentation,
until Srinivasa calmed himself down and tried to pacify the others. "On our long
journey we passed safely through many dangerous places. But here we accidentally
fell asleep and everything has been easily stolen. There must be some hidden
purpose behind this incident." Sri Thakura Mahasaya also took heart and
privately said, "This must be a divine arrangement in order that this country
receive some special mercy." At that time they suddenly heard an oracle in the
sky, "Do not worry, the books will soon be recovered."
Shortly thereafter, someone whispered to Srinivasa, "The king is the real
culprit, go to Vanavisnupura." Hearing this, Srinivasa first consoled his
companions and sent a letter to Vrndavana. He requested Sri Thakura Mahasaya to
go to Kheturi without hesitation, and told Syamananda, "Go immediately to
Utkala via Sri Kheturi. I shall go to Vanavisnupura and fetch the books, then
I will send you a letter to reassure you that the books have been recovered. Now
don't worry and don't think about anything else." Saying this he bade farewell
to them. It was impossible for them to disobey the order of Sri Acarya, yet they
could not conceal their grief when they were about to leave. Together Narottama
and Syamananda traveled to Kheturi, but Narottama did not let Syamananda go to
Utkala.
In Vanavisnupura Srinivasa bestowed his mercy upon King Vira Hamvira, who
happily returned the books without hesitation. Later the king, along with his
followers and family, took shelter under the lotus feet of Srinivasa and became
great devotees. This incident is elaborately described in Bhakti-ratnakara.
Relieved and happy, Sri Acarya Thakura sent word to Vrndavana assuring the
devotees that the books had been recovered. He also sent a letter to relieve
the minds of Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda in Kheturi. Upon receiving the
news they joyfully raised their hands, singing and dancing ecstatically. Sri
Santosa Datta, the son of Sri Purusottama Datta, was also jubilant. Santosa was
the son of Narottama's uncle and was full of all good qualities. Krsnananda
Datta had appointed him as the heir to the throne. He was a good and kind
hearted king and gave profuse charity to the brahmanas, scholars and poor. Sri
Thakura Mahasaya happily sent a reply to Srinivasa in Vanavisnupura.
Thereafter Syamananda took his leave. The parting of Narottama and Syamananda
was a pathetic scene. Even the animals and birds cried upon hearing the loving
exchange between the two dear friends. Sri Thakura Mahasaya selected an escort
to accompany Syamananda to Utkala, and Syamananda began his journey with a heavy
heart.
Syamananda traveled to Amvika via Navadvipa. There he was overwhelmed with
ecstatic emotion upon observing the temple of Sri Gaura-Nitai. Seeing Syamananda
crying helplessly, someone rushed to inform Sri Hrdaya Caitanya of Syamananda's
arrival, "Your Dukhi Krsnadasa is here. I saw him lying on the ground in front
of the temple praying to the Lord with extreme humility. I was completely amazed
by the boy's expressions of love and devotion. I cannot describe how his eyes
incessantly shed tears. Since he did not come to see you, I ran here immediately
to inform you of his arrival."
Hearing this, Thakura was jubilant and excitedly requested that the man
immediately bring Syamananda to see him, "I am eagerly waiting for him", he
said. "I am very proud of his devotional service. After taking initiation from
me, he lived here for a long time and captured Sri Nitai Caitanya with the
bonds of his love. I affectionately sent him to Vrndavana, where he completed
his devotional studies. During that time he wrote me regularly to inform me of
his progress. Understanding his thirst for knowledge, I permitted him to carry

[p.16]
on. In Vrndavana he was so happily engaged in the service of the Nikunja, that
eventually his named was changed from Dukhi to Syamananda. Everyone in Vrndavana
loves him dearly. He had already written to me that he would be coming here
soon. By the desire of Gaura Nitai he will perform exalted service which will
be acknowledged throughout the world. Mind you, he is my favorite disciple and
I am anxious to see him after such a long time."
At that moment Syamananda appeared on the spot and fell at the feet of his
spiritual master. Sri Hrdaya Caitanya Thakura affectionately placed his feet on
Syamananda's head. When he tried to embrace his disciple, Syamananda shrank
away and stood in a distant place. Nevertheless Thakura grabbed him and embraced
him lovingly and then took him to the temple of Mahaprabhu.
There he dedicated Syamananda to the feet of Gaura-Nitai. Thakura then brought
Syamananda to his house and gave him the remnants of his food to eat, which
Syamananda relished happily. Thakura eagerly inquired about recent events, and
Syamananda pleased his guru with an elaborate description of everything.
Syamananda stayed with his spiritual master for a long time serving him
wholeheartedly. However, one day Hrdaya Caitanya said, "Do not delay any longer,
you must leave for Utkala at once. The Lord has many plans for you to execute
there." Saying this, he brought Syamananda before Gaura-Nitai and gave him the
garland offered to the Deities. After bestowing his blessings upon Syamananda,
Hrdaya Caitanya bade him farewell. Crying pathetically, Syamananda said goodbye
to his spiritual master, who was also unable to hold back his tears.
I will not describe Syamananda's journey to Utkala, but I shall mention that
along the way Syamananda freely distributed his mercy and saved many fallen
souls from the repetition of birth and death. In Utkala he accepted many
disciples, of which Sri Rasikananda was one. Due to the powerful preaching of
Syamananda and his disciples the whole country became purified. I have
elaborately described these incidents in Bhakti-ratnakara.
When Syamananda finally arrived in Utkala he immediately sent a letter to Sri
Thakura Mahasaya to inform him of his safe arrival. Thakura Mahasaya, who had
been waiting anxiously to hear from Syamananda, was happy and relieved to
receive his letter. He immediately sent the letter on to the devotees in
Vanavisnupura, and wrote a reply to Syamananda.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya then left Kheturi and started for Navadvipa. Narottama
remained in an ecstatic loving trance as he traveled, like a maddened elephant.
A continuous shower of tears streamed down his face, wetting his chest.
Everyone who saw him observed his expressions of divine love with astonishment.
As he passed through various villages the residents became enchanted by his
presence and followed along behind him. Once he set foot in a village, the
inhabitants ran to greet him, swarming around him like bumblebees. And when he
left the village, the inhabitants sank into the depths of sorrow.
Traveling in this way he eventually reached the boarder of Navadvipa. Observing
the beautiful countryside he began to lament, "Oh, most merciful Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu, why have you sent me into this world now? Being unable to witness
your divine pastimes in Nadia I am lost in intense suffering." Thinking in this
way, he walked on very slowly, crying pitifully. But to his astonishment, when
he entered Navadvipa proper, he found that each and every house was full of joy
and happiness. In every corner the loud chanting of "Hari, Hari" resounded.
From all directions men and women eagerly rushed to the house of Sri Caitanya.
There the Lord and His associates danced ecstatically in sankirtana, thus
Navadvipa was floating in the ocean of happiness.
For some time Narottama enjoyed the vision of this joyous scene, when suddenly,
everything changed. Again the city of Nadia was sunk into the depths of despair.
Narottama burst out crying, "Oh Lord, what have I seen?" Narottama sat
thoughtfully for some time, then eventually asked a passerby where he could

[p.17]
find the house of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. With his head hung down, tears
streaming from his eyes, the man replied, "Look over there, that is the house
of Prabhu, go in this way." Seeing the Lord's house Narottama began to cry also.
At that time Suklambara brahmacari happened to be passing by and his curiosity
was aroused upon seeing Narottama. Narottama bowed to his feet, and Suklambara
asked, "Who are you"? When Narottama stated his name, Suklambara immediately
broke out in tears and warmly embraced Narottama with deep affection. With
a choked voice he explained to Narottama, "When Gauracandra was absorbed in
ecstatic trance in the village of Ramakeli, He called out your name lovingly.
Who can understand the mystery of the Lord's pastimes? At that time he predicted
your arrival here. Oh my son, all the mahantas, including myself, have been
eagerly waiting for you. Actually Prabhu's disappearance is unbearable for us.
Some of us have already disappeared from this world."
He then introduced himself to Narottama and brought him to meet all the other
remaining devotees of Gauranga. Narottama worshipped everyone's feet, and they
embraced him. Though they were merged in intense suffering due to separation
from the Lord, they felt immediate relief and happiness upon seeing Narottama.
They eagerly questioned Narottama about many things, and Narottama happily
answered them all. Damodara Pandita and others did not want Narottama to leave
them, thus Narottama stayed in Nadia a few more days in the houses of the
favorite associates of Mahaprabhu. Narottama was so fortunate that in his dreams
he was able to meet those devotees who he had not met there due to their demise.
After a few days passed the devotees reluctantly, and with heavy hearts, allowed
Narottama to leave. They told him sweetly, "Prabhu has kept us alive only to see
you. But, alas, we will not be able to see Srinivasa." Saying this, their voices
choked with emotion. With a perturbed mind, Narottama touched everyone's feet
and went to Gauracandra's house for a final visit. There he found even the
servants and maidservants of Prabhu on the verge of death, due to separation.
Seeing Narottama, their misery doubled. Blessing Narottama they said, "Due to
the wish of Prabhu, you will execute His plans and perform wonderful service."
Then they bade him farewell. Narottama cried loudly and fell on the ground in
the courtyard of Gauranga. After a long time, he controlled himself and started
for Santipura.
Narottama was charmed by the beauty of Santipura. He went to the house of
Advaita Acarya and worshipped the feet of Sri Acyutananda, son of Advaita
Prabhu. He was merciful to Narottama and introduced him to all the devotes.
Later he ordered Narottama, "Go to Nilacala first and then come back to your
place and begin to popularize kirtana." Saying this he began to weep and his
thin body trembled. Narottama again worshipped the feet of all the devotees and
took his leave.
Arriving at Harinadi village he crossed the Ganges and entered Amvika. There he
asked someone where he could find the house of Hrdaya Caitanya Pandita, and
found out that he was not far away. Someone who had seen Narottama pass by,
rushed ahead to Hrdaya Caitanya and informed him excitedly, "A beautiful young
man who is filled with love for Gaura-Nitai is coming to see you." Sri Hrdaya
Caitanya immediately understood that it was non-other than his beloved
Narottama. Filled with emotion, he ran to the door step to welcome his disciple.
Narottama fell at the feet of his guru, who tearfully welcomed him, taking him
in his lap. He then took Narottama to the temple of Gaura-Nitai for darsana.
Seeing his beloved Lord's before him, Narottama fell on the ground crying.
Hrdaya Caitanya pacified him and gave him the Deities garland.
With great affection, Sri Hrdaya Caitanya kept Narottama with him for 2 to 4
days and then, after dedicating him to the feet of Gaura-Nitai, ordered him to
go to Nilacala. All the great Bhagavatas, including Sri Hrdaya Caitanya, were
deeply aggrieved to see him go.

[p.18]
Narottama traveled quickly, eager to reach Khardaha. He became so excited upon
entering Khardaha proper, that he lost his usual reserve. Mahesa Pandita and
others rushed to greet Narottama when they saw him approaching. "We were dying
with separation from the Lord," they said, "but now you have come to soothe our
aching hearts, like a cooling oasis in the desert of misery. We have known about
you for a long time and have already heard about your travels to Vrndavana, the
stealing of the manuscripts, as well as your visit to Navadvipa. We are so happy
to finally see you." Saying this they each introduced themselves, and Narottama
tearfully worshipped their feet. Thereafter they took Narottama to the house of
Prabhu. When Sri Vasu and Jahnava were told of Narottama's arrival, they eagerly
requested that he be brought to the interior of the house immediately. Entering
the room, Narottama felt himself extremely fortunate and worshipped the feet of
the two Iswari's, then bowed to the lotus feet of Sri Virabhadra. Upon seeing
Narottama, Sri Vasu and Jahnava could not conceal their overwhelming love for
him. "The title Mahasaya is rightly attributed to him," they said. Out of
affection, they kept Narottama with them for four days and all of the devotees
of Khardaha came to meet him. Sri Vasu, Jahnava and Viracandra could not bear
to leave him for a moment. The all-knowing Sri Jahnava Thakurani privately spoke
to Narottama and ordered him to go to Nilacala soon. At the time of Narottama's
departure, Mahesa Pandita and others embraced Narottama again and again and also
advised him to go to Nilacala. Narottama bowed to their feet and took his leave
crying. The devotees accompanied him for some distance, then after pacifying
themselves, as well as Narottama, they returned home.
He who attentively hears this narration of Narottama's journey in Gauda will
have his desires fulfilled. So listen attentively as I, Sri Narahari Dasa,
narrate Narottama Vilasa.

[p.19]
THE FOURTH VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acarya, and
all the devotees of the Lord. Please shower your mercy upon this poor soul. All
glories to the all-merciful listeners. Now listen attentively as I narrate this
episode of Narottama Vilasa.
As Sri Thakura Mahasaya began his journey to Nilacala his mind was filled with
loving thoughts of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. With due reverence Narottama choose
to take the same road which had formerly been traversed by Sri Caitanya Candra
Himself. At night Narottama halted at the same villages which the Lord had
chosen as His resting place, and also discussed topics of Krsna with the local
people, just as Mahaprabhu had done previously. When Narottama happened to meet
someone who had personally met Mahaprabhu, he could not check his emotions and
cried uncontrollably. Everyone who met Narottama was extremely pleased and
immediately began glorifying him, "Sri Krsna Caitanya is the most merciful and
loving incarnation. Only one who is His great devotee is capable of displaying
such divine attributes as we see in this handsome young man. Just see how
gracefully walks, and how comforting it is to one's eyes to simply glance upon
his face." Speaking in this way the people became enchanted by the presence of
Narottama. In the morning when it was time for Narottama to resume his journey
crowds of local people swarmed around him, following along behind him as he
walked. Narottama was unable to disperse the crowd, but eventually, with sweet
words, he bid them farewell and continued his journey, halting only in those
places where Mahaprabhu had performed His divine pastimes.
Narottama became ecstatic upon reaching the place where Nityananda Prabhu had
broken the sannyasa stick of Sri Caitanya. He listened intently as the local
people described this incidence, then, after expressing his gratitude to those
persons, he continued along his way.
An aged brahmana, who was a great Vaisnava scholar, happened to pass Narottama
on the road. Observing Narottama's devotional mood, suddenly something came to
his mind. He slowly approached Narottama and asked mildly, "What is your name,
my son? From where are you coming?"
Upon hearing Narottama's reply the brahmana's suspicion was confirmed. With
tears of ecstacy rolling down his face the brahmana warmly embraced Narottama
saying, "For so long I have heard about you and I was cherishing the hope of
one day meeting you. Today providence has shown its mercy upon me. I have just
come from Ksetra, where I received the mercy of those associates of Prabhu who
are still alive in Nilacala, and now I have luckily found you here. With great
pleasure I heard them describe your glories while I resided there. I heard that
you were bringing books from Vrndavana to Gauda, but unfortunately they were
stolen along the way. I also heard that you would soon be coming to Ksetra and
everyone was eagerly waiting for you. Gopinatha Acarya and Kasi Misra explained
that Mahaprabhu had called for you when He visited the village of Ramakeli. At
that time Nityananda and other devotees were very happy and since then they
have all been eagerly waiting for you. Today, I have received the good fortune
to meet you personally, but now you must not delay. Go as quickly as possible
to Ksetra and I shall meet you there later."
At that time the brahmana's son arrived there. He introduced his son to
Narottama and ordered him to accompany Narottama to Ksetra. The brahmana then
happily bade them farewell. Narottama took the dust of the feet of the brahmana
to his head and started his journey with the son of the brahmana.
Upon reaching Ksetra, Narottama and his companion observed the beauty of Lake
Narendra. Remembering the Lord's pastimes sporting within the water there,
Narottama was unable to hold back his tears. He quickly took his bath and
hurried off towards the Lion Gate.

[p.20]
At that time Sri Gopinatha Acarya and other devotees where also walking towards
the Simhadvara. While walking Sri Sikhi Mahiti said to Mangaraja, "I can't
understand why my mind is leaping with joy." And Kanai Khuntia said, "I don't
understand what is about to happen but it is evident from the auspicious omens
that something wonderful is awaiting us." Gopinatha Acarya told Vaninatha, "I
think we are going to meet Narottama here soon."
As they were speaking in this way the brahmana's son approached them and
informed them of Narottama's arrival. Who can describe the devotees jubilation
upon receiving this news? The brahmana boy then rushed back to Narottama and
helped him to identify the devotees who were approaching from a distance.
Seeing all the devotees Narottama was overwhelmed with emotion. He immediately
fell on the ground bowing to their feet. With tears streaming from his eyes,
Gopinatha Acarya ran to greet Narottama and embraced him affectionately.
Later, when Narottama had calmed down, they took him to the temple to see Sri
Jagannatha Deva. After entering through the Lion Gate, Narottama first bowed
before Sri Nrsimha Deva. Upon seeing Sri Jagannatha along with Sri Balarama and
Sri Subhadra sitting on Their thrones, Narottama was filled with ecstatic
emotions. Sri Padmalocana, Sri Jagannatha Deva, benevolently bestowed His mercy
upon Narottama. The priest of Sri Jagannatha Deva, understanding the mind of
his Lord, brought Sri Jagannatha Deva's garland and offered it to Narottama.
Narottama was unable to control his emotions and wept incessantly. After
pacifying Narottama, Gopinatha Acarya took him to his house. There he instructed
one experienced person to accompany Narottama to the samadhis of the departed
associates of the Lord. Thereafter he informed everyone of Narottama's arrival
in Nilacala and brought varieties of mahaprasada from the temple for him.
Meanwhile, Narottama came across some persons who were talking to one another
in this way: "Alas, Nilacala has now become the abode of misery. All the
associates of Sri Gauracandra are gradually departing from this world. Sri
Gopinatha Acarya and other great Vaisnavas have become lean and weak." Someone
else said: "I recently visited Gopinatha and I cannot describe what I saw there.
Unable to bear the misery of separation from Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Sri Mamu
Gosvami is practically lifeless. He is lying emaciated in a lonely corner. I am
afraid that he will die soon." Overhearing this conversation, Narottama's heart
ached with misery.
Narottama then traveled on to have darsana of Tota Gopinatha. The vision of the
beautiful Lord with His shining black complexion seated upon His throne could
easily defeat the pride of Cupid. Narottama, deeply moved, laid prostrate before
the Deity crying. Seeing him the priest offered him the Lord's garland.
Narottama and his escort then went to see the seat of Sri Pandita Gosvami. He
fell on the ground before the seat, and, again the priest gave him a garland.
Crying uncontrollably Narottama lamented, "Oh Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami Prabhu,
how unfortunate I am for not having the opportunity to see you." Narottama's
pathetic crying could melt even wood or stone.
Sri Mamu Gosvami, who had been lying in a half-unconscious state crying,
suddenly got up and heaving a heavy sigh asked, "Who is crying?" They replied,
"Narottama has arrived from Gauda." Upon hearing the name of Narottama, he broke
out in floods of tears and embraced Narottama emotionally. Unable to control
himself, Mamu Gosvami fell on the ground, and outcry of anguish arose from
the devotees in the temple of Gopinatha. By the grace of the Lord, Mamu Gosvami
gradually calmed down and everyone was pacified. Though Gosvami's life was in
a precarious state, he was exceedingly happy to see Narottama and asked about
his well being. Hearing Narottama's sweet words, Mamu Gosvami became extremely
moved by Narottama's sweet words and thus dedicated Narottama to the feet of
Gopinatha and ordered him, "Go to see the tomb of Haridasa Thakura, Gopinatha
Acarya is waiting for you there."

[p.21]
Without delay, Narottama and his escort went to the tomb of Haridasa Thakura on
the seashore. He was so shaken to see the tomb that no one could pacify him.
Eventually, the Vaisnava in charge of the samadhi, managed to slightly console
Narottama and sent him to Gopinatha Acarya's house. Gopinatha Acarya, a very
warm hearted person, with tender words encouraged Narottama to sit peacefully
by his side and told him, "Everyone here is greatly eager to see you. Take some
rest now and afterwards you can meet all the devotees."
How can I describe the state of mind of the residents of Nilacala? Due to the
Lord's disappearance, they had given up eating, drinking and sleeping. They
lived only in hopes of seeing Narottama. Thus when they saw Narottama
approaching their houses, they eagerly rushed out to greet him. As Narottama's
escort introduced each devotee, they affectionately embraced him and Narottama
and touched their feet. Thereafter they went to the house of Gopinatha who
lovingly offered them seats. Everyone had questions to ask Narottama and he
answered them all, reporting everything in detail. Thereafter Gopinatha Acarya
requested the devotees to relish mahaprasada along with Narottama. After washing
their mouths, they returned to their houses and requested Narottama to take some
rest.
When it was time to go to the temple, Narottama got up and took his bath and
Kanai Khuntia took him to the temple of Jagannatha. Narottama remained there
throughout the afternoon, observing all three arati ceremonies {sandhya
(evening) and sayana (at bed time)} one after another. He and Kanai Khuntia
then returned to the house of Gopinatha Acarya. No one wanted to give up
Narottama's association, but on the order of Acarya, they took their leave.
Gopinatha, whose affection for Narottama was beyond compare, then requested him
to take rest. After Narottama went to bed, Gopinatha also entered into his room.
However, Narottama's mind was too agitated and he was unable to sleep. Yet
after some time, by the wish of the Lord, he finally fell asleep and in his
dream he saw his worshipful Lord and all the devotees dancing in front of the
chariot of Sri Jagannatha. He saw Sri Krsna Caitanya, Nitai, Sri Advaita,
Gadadhara Pandita Gosvami, Srivasa Pandita, Murari Gupta, Govinda, Haridasa,
Kasi Misra, Ramananda Raya, Vasudeva Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, Kasisvara,
Jagadisa Pandita, Vasu Ghosh, Mukunda, Madhava, Vakresvara, Govinda dasa, Mahesa
Pandita, Damodara, Svarupa Gosvami, Suklambara brahmacari, Dasa Gadadhara, Yadu,
Sri Kansari, Sridhara, Suryadasa, Ramai Sundara, Dhananjaya, Ramananda Vasu
Ghosh, Sankara, Sanjaya, Lokanatha, Bhugarbha, Sri Rupa, Sanatana, Sri Jiva,
Gopala Bhatta, Krsnadasa brahmacari, Pandita Raghava, Paramananda Bhattacarya,
Acarya Madhava, Raghunatha, Raghunatha Bhatta, Sri Tapana Misra, King Sri
Prataparudra, Acarya Gopinatha, Sri Sikhi Mahiti etc.
He saw all Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu's devotees from Gauda, Vraja, Utkala and
South India performing pastimes with the Lord. Who could describe the
extraordinary captivating beauty of this scene? Sri Gauracandra danced in the
middle surrounded by all the devotees. Inspired by the Lord's presence, the
devotees performed ecstatic sankirtana, joyfully dancing, singing and playing
musical instruments. The atmosphere was so divine that even the demigods came
down from their heavenly abodes to enjoy the Lord's pastimes. As the sound of
sankirtana penetrated the air, the entire three worlds began to float on waves
of happiness. Huge crowds of people eagerly pushed forward to get a glimpse of
the Lord's beautiful dancing, as the demigods showered flowers on Mahaprabhu's
head. Even the lame, the blind and the deaf suddenly forgot their handicaps and
dashed forward to join in the sankirtana. Even stone hearted persons wept in
joy upon hearing the melodious chanting. Even the animals and birds became
restless.
Standing in the corner Narottama joyfully watched this wonderful scene with
tears rolling down his cheeks. Seeing Narottama, Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, in
trance, grabbed hold of Narottama's hands and said mildly, "You must manifest

[p.22]
a new type of kirtana which will have the potency to mesmerize the people.
Through your songs and music you should explain My pastimes and mission. Don't
worry about anything, all your desires will be fulfilled. Now go to Gauda as
soon as possible and preach the glories of devotional service. Those who are
fortunate enough to take shelter in you, will receive the most precious wealth
of love of God. Soon you will link up with Ramacandra, son of Ciranjiva Sena.
What else can I say? I shall always take care of you." All the devotees of the
Lord were extremely happy to see Lord Caitanya shower His mercy so profusely
upon Narottama. Nityananda, Advaita, Gadadhara, Haridasa, Sarvabhauma, Ramananda
Raya, Srivasa, Vakresvara and others embraced Narottama tightly. Narottama fell
on the ground in a pool of tears. Mahaprabhu's devotees consoled Narottama and
advised him to go to Gauda.
Suddenly Narottama awoke with a heavy heart. Somehow he managed to calm himself
and hastily finished his morning duties. Afterwards, Gopinatha Acarya sent him
with Sikhi Mahiti to Sri Jagannatha Deva's arati. As soon as Narottama began to
think about going to Gauda, Lord Jagannatha's garland fell from His neck and
the priest gave Narottama that garland. Narottama considered this the Lord's
indication to him to leave at once for Gauda. After bowing to the feet of
Jagannatha, he went to the house of Gopinatha Acarya and before Narottama could
say anything, Gopinatha said, "The Lord has ordered you to go to Gauda." Thus
after consulting with the other mahantas of Sriksetra a date was fixed for
Narottama's departure.
When Narottama was about to leave the devotees held his hands and said happily,
"We eagerly waited to meet you for so long, now are dreams have finally been
fulfilled. We are also hoping to have so good fortune to meet Srinivasa Acarya,
and perhaps someday we will have the darsana of the exalted Dukhi Krsnadasa,
who is now called Syamananda." Saying this they began to weep. Hearing their
loving words Narottama was also moved to tears. After assigning an escort to
accompany Narottama, they reluctantly bade farewell. Narottama began his journey
along with his escort who carefully carried a basket of mahaprasada.
With a heavy heart and tear filled eyes, Narottama traveled until reaching
Narendra lake. There he met the brahmana and his son whom he had met upon
arriving at Ksetra. Narottama took the dust of his feet to his head and the
brahmana embraced him saying, "Oh my dear Narottama, you are more dear to me
than my life. I knew that you would be passing by today on your way to Gauda so
I finished my duties as quickly as possible. Now, by the mercy of Jagannatha
Deva, you have come. If I would have missed you I would have burned in the fire
of my own sorrow." He did not want to let Narottama go but he had to. He blessed
Narottama and walking along with him begging again and again to come with him,
but Narottama would not consent.
Narottama then started walking swiftly. He took rest for two days at Yajapura
and then went on to Nrsimhapura. Someone who spotted him rushed ahead and
informed Syamananda that Sri Thakura Mahasaya was coming from Ksetra. Syamananda
was overwhelmed with ecstasy. Hurriedly, he and his men rushed to greet Sri
Thakura Mahasaya. Seeing each other, they were both overcome with emotion and
wept and bowed to each of continuously. Narottama held Syamananda tightly to his
bosom and did not want to be separated.
Those who observed their meeting were amazed. Someone said, "Oh, how incredible,
I have never seen anything so wonderful in my life." Another person commented,
"Oh, how lucky I am to see Sri Thakura Mahasaya for whom I was waiting for such
a long time." Someone else said, "Will we be so fortunate as to see Acarya
Thakura once in our life?" Another person answered, "Certainly Srinivasa Acarya
will bestow his mercy upon us." Even the villagers came running to see Sri
Thakura Mahasaya. Although Syamananda arranged a solitary house for Sri Thakura
Mahasaya, still the people came to see Narottama in his house. Those persons who
had the extraordinary good fortune to receive Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda's

[p.23]
association and mercy were fortunate beyond compare. The entire country became
blessed by contact with Sri Syamananda (Narottama?).
Sri Thakura Mahasaya happily bathed and performed his other duties. Afterwards
he sat down with Syamananda, who slowly informed Narottama, "A few days ago
Acarya Thakura left Vanavisnupura for Yajigrama. Yesterday afternoon I received
this letter. Please look at it." Narottama cried joyfully and happily read the
letter with the utmost care. Syamananda then explained, "He sent another letter
along with mahaprasada from Sri Amvika." Again Narottama's heart surged with
happiness and he praised Syamananda for his good fortune. Touching the
mahaprasada to his head, he ate some of it and became mad with joy. Sri Thakura
Mahasaya ordered his men, "Bring the mahaprasada of Sri Jagannatha and gave
some of it to Syamananda." Narottama then carefully explained to Syamananda,
"The associates of Lord Caitanya who are still alive in Nilacala are now
suffering greatly due to the miserable fire of separation. I cannot describe
their condition. Only due to the Lord's desire they are still alive. They are
simply waiting to see you. So, please do not make delay, start for Nilacala at
once. After touching the feet of the devotees there, go to Utkala and benedict
the people there by distributing the sublime treasure of pure devotional
service. After some time I will send you a letter, requesting you and your men
to go to Kheturi."
Syamananda and Narottama stayed together a few more days, meanwhile the entire
village came to know of Syamananda and Narottama's eminent departure. Who could
describe the sadness at the time of their separation? All of Syamananda's
disciples cried miserably, especially Rasika Murari could not stop crying. Sri
Thakura Mahasaya affectionately embraced him and was extremely loving and
merciful to all those who had taken shelter at the feet of Syamananda. Thakura
Mahasaya blessed all of them and then started for Gauda. At this point
Syamananda helplessly broke out in tears and no one could pacify him.
Thereafter, with a heavy heart, Syamananda began his journey to Nilacala.
I have described Syamananda's journey to Nilacala in Bhakti-ratnakara.
Please listen attentively as I, Narahari, narrate Narottama Vilasa.

[p.24]
THE FIFTH VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda, Advaita and all the
devotees. Please bestow your mercy upon this poor soul. All glories to the
merciful listeners. Now listen attentively as I continue my narration.
When Narottama arrived at the famous village of Srikhanda in Gauda, someone
spotted him approaching the house of Sarkara Thakura and rushed ahead to
announce his arrival: "A very attractive man with a magnificent gait is coming
this way, along with four other persons. Most likely he is coming from
Nilacala." Thakura immediately understood that it was none other than Narottama.
Seeing Narottama in the distance, Sri Raghunandana rushed to greet him. When
the local people informed Narottama about Raghunandana, he happily fell on the
ground offering obeisances as Raghunandana approached him running. Raghunandana
immediately embraced Narottama. Speechless with emotion he cried uncontrollably.
Gradually he managed to calm himself and quickly took Narottama to his house.
There Narottama saw Sri Sarkara Thakura and fell at his feet.
Though Sarkara Thakura was sunk in the ocean of sorrow due to separation from
the Lord, when he saw Narottama he was overwhelmed with joy. He took Narottama
in his lap and tearfully told him, "I am so happy to see you. In Mahaprabhu's
absence, He will distribute love of God through you. Many fallen souls will
take shelter in you, and you will spread the Lord's ecstatic message by
manifesting a new type of kirtana. In this way all your desires will be
fulfilled by the mercy of Lord Caitanya. Do not worry about anything. You
should go to Kheturi via Yajigrama, as Srinivasa Acarya recently returned from
Vanavisnupura and is eagerly waiting for you there. He is constantly thinking
about you. Yesterday he came here but returned to his house on the same day."
After that he asked Narottama about Sri Ksetra and Narottama vividly reported
everything, which filled Sarkara Thakura with ecstatic emotions. Checking his
sentiments, Thakura ordered Sri Raghunandana to take Narottama to the courtyard
of Gauranga.
Upon seeing the Deity of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Narottama could not control
himself and fell on the ground in a pool of tears. The priest tried to console
him by offering him the garland from the Deity. Having heard of Narottama's
arrival, the inhabitants of Srikhanda eagerly gathered in the courtyard of
Gauranga to greet and praise Narottama. Narottama then took some mahaprasada to
the house of Sri Sarkara and asked Raghunandana to offer it to Sarkara Thakura,
who became ecstatic upon eating the prasada of Sri Jagannatha. He then ordered
Sri Raghunandana to distribute the mahaprasada to all the devotees. Thus
everyone relished the prasada, while absorbed in memories of Sri Gauranga and
His pastimes in Nilacala. Thereafter they sat together and enjoyed discussions
about Sri Krsna. In this way the devotees happily treasured Narottama's
association and could not even think of being separated from him.
In the morning, Narottama finished his daily duties, took darsana of Sri
Gauranga, and went to meet Sarkara Thakura. With deep feeling and gravity
Thakura looked at Narottama and said, "How peaceful it is to look upon your
face. I shall not have this opportunity a second time." Narottama could not
bear this sad thought and fell at Thakura's feet crying. Sri Thakura embraced
Narottama and bade him farewell. Narottama bowed to the feet of all the
inhabitants of Srikhanda and began his journey. Sri Raghunandana, not wanting
to leave Narottama's company, walked along with him for some distance. He then
appointed one man to accompany Narottama to Yajigrama and tearfully said
goodbye.
Upon reaching Yajigrama, the escort pointed to one house and said, "That is
the house of Srinivasa Acarya where he teaches his students."
In the meantime someone reported to Acarya that Sri Thakura Mahasaya had come
from Sri Ksetra. Srinivasa Acarya at once got up and hurried towards the door,

[p.25]
when Narottama suddenly entered the house. Seeing each other, their hearts
leapt with joy and both of them burst into tears. Narottama fell at Acarya's
feet and Acarya lovingly embraced him. Who can understand the nature of such
exalted personalities? Although physically two different persons, they were of
suchlike minds that they felt as if one. When they had calmed down they sat and
conversed together intently.
In the meantime, a learned brahmana, who had come from Ksetra in hopes of
studying the books of the Gosvamis, arrived there. He politely submitted himself
before Srinivasa, who inquired from him about events in Sri Nilacala.
Heaving a heavy sigh, the brahmana said tearfully, "Nilacala has lost her
jewels. Since the day that Thakura Mahasaya left a chain of miserable events
has come to reign there. Practically all the associates of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu began to disappear from this world. Syamananda faced terrible
miseries when he arrived there. Only due to the will of the Lord, was he able
to maintain his life. Those who are still alive, consoled Syamananda and bade
him farewell. Then he returned to his own place. I witnessed all of this with
my own eyes and was unable to stay there any longer, so I started walking and
didn't not stop until I reached Gauda." Saying this the brahmana began to cry,
calling out the names of the departed devotees of Ksetra. Acarya Thakura,
Narottama, Vyasa Cakravarti and Krsnavallabha all cried along with him.
Considerable time passed before Acarya Thakura was able to console himself and
the brahmana. He then arranged accommodations for the brahmana and from that
day began teaching him. Who knows what Acarya Thakura and Narottama discussed
privately amongst themselves?
The next day morning, Thakura Mahasaya took his leave of Acarya Thakura. Acarya
Thakura stood stone-like staring at the path which Narottama traversed, bathing
himself with his own tears. Vyasa Cakravarti and a few other devotees
accompanied Narottama for some distance, until Narottama very lovingly forbade
them go any further.
Narottama eventually arrived at Kantakanagara, the place of Sri Kesava Bharati.
Who can describe Narottama's condition upon seeing Dasa Gadadhara's Deity of
Sri Gauranga there? Sri Yadunandana Cakravarti, the disciple of Sri Gadadhara
and a scholar of all scriptures, became excited when he saw Narottama and
hurried out of the temple to greet him. He offered the Lord's garland to
Narottama and embraced him warmly with tears in his eyes. In a chocked voice he
told Narottama, "It is so wonderful that you have finally come here. Prabhu
Gadadhara has been impatiently waiting for you for a long time. Again and again
he has asked me, `Go see whether Narottama has come yet.' Oh my dear brother,
what can I say? The ocean of misery is extremely turbulent here. After the
demise of Sri Visnupriya Iswari, my Prabhu returned from Navadvipa and has been
spending his days alone here. Lost in an ocean of misery, he is unable to eat
and has become completely emaciated."
Saying this he took Narottama to Dasa Gadadhara who was sitting alone with dust
all over his body. His closed eyes continuously shed tears. Merged in thoughts
of Sri Gaurahari, he sighed heavily and repeatedly uttered, "Hari, Hari." At an
opportune moment, Yadunandana said quietly, "Narottama has come from Ksetra."
As soon as the name of Narottama entered his ears, Sri Gadadhara opened his eyes
crying loudly. With outstretched hands, he embraced Narottama soaking him with
his tears. Narottama touched the feet of Gadadhara and reported everything to
him about his recent travels. Blessing Narottama, Sri Gadadhara said, "All your
desires will be fulfilled. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu will definitely dance along
with your kirtana. Now you should go to Kheturi and distribute love of God to
the people there."
Sri Yadunandana then took Narottama to another dwelling place and said, "See,
this is the place where Sri Kesava Bharati lived. And here is the place where
Prabhu cut His hair and took sannyasa from Bharati." At this point they broke

[p.26]
into tears and Narottama fell unconscious on the ground. A long time passed
before they were able to enter into the temple and observe the beautiful Deity
of Gauracandra. Narottama stayed there for the day and the following morning,
thinking of the lotus feet of Sri Nityananda Balarama, he started for Ekacakra
village in Radha.
At the entrance of the village Nityananda, in the guise of an old brahmana,
asked Narottama, "What is your name and from where are you coming? Where will
you go and for what purpose?" Narottama replied, "I am Narottama, coming from
Ksetra. I have come to the birth place of Nityananda, whose parents were
Padmavati and Hadai Pandita, because I want to see the sacred places where Sri
Nityananda Prabhu performed his pastimes. I live on the other side of the
Padmavati in Sri Kheturi and from here I shall return there."
Hearing Narottama's sweet words, the old brahmana smiled and without disclosing
anything said, "I know everything. Come along with me, I shall show you all."
The brahmana guided Narottama to a particular spot and said, "See, this is the
place where Nityananda and His friends enjoyed grazing cattle like the Gopas.
Nityananda roamed about in this area holding His club and plow. And this is the
place where He performed Ramalila. As Balarama performed His pastimes in
Svetadvipa, similarly Nityananda performed His pastimes here. Now let me show
you the house of Hadai Pandita where Nityananda Raya took birth. Here is the
spot where He held a snake. See, over here, this is where His Gurukarana
ceremony was performed. Now look at this temple of Visnu where He used to
worship the Lord. This is where that sannyasi came and ate and afterwards
begged Nityananda from his father. This is the road by which the sannyasi and
Nityananda left, followed by all the inhabitants of this village. In this spot
Nityananda's mother loudly lamented for her son, and over here Hadai Pandita
rolled on the ground in anguish at losing his son. Here Padmavati devi laid
unconscious and Hadai Pandita consoled her. Oh Narottama, mind these places
which I am showing you are beyond the grasp of even the demigods. In this
Ekacakra village, Nityananda Raya still performs His pastimes and only the
fortunate can see them." Saying this much, the brahmana vanished.
The sudden disappearance of the old brahmana bewildered Narottama. "What is
this," he thought, "one moment he was here and then he vanished like a bolt
from the blue." Narottama became extremely restless and thought, "If I cannot
see him anymore, I shall commit suicide by entering into fire." Saying this
Narottama began to lament pitifully.
Nityananda Haladhara who is an ocean of mercy again appeared before Narottama
in the guise of the old brahmana. This time, the brahmana suddenly turned into
Balarama, carrying his club and plow, wearing a topknot on his head and dressed
in beautiful garments. Then suddenly Balarama turned into Nityananda. Smilingly
he said to Narottama, "You are my favorite, I have no intention to deceive you.
Very soon all your desires will be fulfilled. But don't disclose to anyone that
you have seen Me here." Saying this He disappeared. Narottama stood transfixed
like a statue, unable to move or speak. He stayed that day at Ekacakra and the
following morning, while glorifying Nityananda Prabhu, King of Ekacakra, the
son of Rohini and the life of the most fallen souls, Narottama began his
journey. Crossing over the Padmavati river he headed towards Kheturi.
Listen attentively as I, Narahari, narrated this Narottama Vilasa.

[p.27]
THE SIXTH VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acarya and
all the devotees. Please bestow your benedictions upon this fallen soul. All
glories to the merciful listeners. Now hear attentively as I continue this
narration.
At an auspicious time, Narottama crossed the Padmavati and entered Sri Kheturi.
People from every corner of the village happily flocked to see him. Sri Santosa
Datta and others greeted Sri Thakura Mahasaya and arranged accommodations for
him in a solitary house. Nevertheless, the house was packed until the evening
with enthusiastic villagers eager for his darsana.
In the evening when Narottama was finally alone, he began to think deeply about
his devotional service to Sri Krsna. Eventually, by the Lord's arrangement, he
finally fell asleep late in the evening. In a dream the son of Saci told him,
"Oh Narottama, in the hope of your coming here, I hid Myself in the form of
a metal Deity in the house of an influential landlord. Everyone knows him
because he is a rich man with many rice-go-downs, but no one will approach these
go-downs because they are full of poisonous snakes. In one of the bigger
go-downs I have concealed Myself. Quickly go and open the door of that go-down
and bring Me to your house." He then advised Narottama to have more Deities
made and then vanished after embracing him.
Narottama excitedly woke to find that it was still dark. He spent the rest of
the night performing sankirtana and in the morning quickly completed his daily
duties. He then asked various persons if they knew of a rich man who had many
rice go-downs which were infested with snakes. Everyone knew the man, and
Narottama requested them to take him there. Thus Narottama, along with a few
others, went to the rich man's house, who was greatly surprised and happy to
receive them. Sri Thakura Mahasaya immediately proceeded straight towards the
rice go-down. The rich man was horrified, falling at Narottama's feet he begged
with folded hands, "Everyone knows that these go-downs are infested with snakes.
Many snake tamers have tried to clear them out but their attempts were in vain.
Long ago I gave up hope of getting rid of the snakes and, although I lost
considerable money, I was forced to close the buildings down. I could not
possibly allow you to go inside. Please tell me, what I can do for you?"
Thakura Mahasaya simply laughed and said, "Don't be nervous, I shall clear it
out now. I have very important business to attend to within your go-down.
Afterwards you will be relieved and happy to see what I will bring out from
inside." Saying this, Thakura Mahasaya undauntedly walked towards the go-down,
as the spectators trembled in fear. But when the snakes saw Thakura Mahasaya,
they immediately left the go-down and went away. In a trance of love, Narottama
opened the door and found Navadvipa Candra with His consort. Their bodies were
fully decorated with ornaments and Their brilliant beauty was beyond compare.
When Narottama picked Them up and lovingly clasped Them to his heart, he was
suddenly jolted as if struck by a bolt of lightning.
Everyone was spellbound to see the Deities and began shouting with joy. Someone
remarked, "It is not possible for an ordinary human being to do such a thing."
Someone else said, "Who can understand him? Because of his presence our village
has become blessed." Another person commented, "If we are fortunate enough,
perhaps we can receive his blessings." All of them danced happily, calling out
the name of Narottama.
As Narottama carried the Deities, a huge crowd followed along behind him. Upon
reaching his house, he placed Sri Gauranga and His consort on a beautiful
celestial seat. With unblinking eyes he stared at the Lord crying incessantly.
Suddenly a thought came to his mind and began spontaneously singing a beautiful
kirtana about the glories of Gauracandra which he had written but had not yet

[p.28]
been heard by others. Narottama sang and danced gracefully, putting the
Gandharvas to shame. Even the Yavanas and the wicked souls became mad and sang
the glories of Gauranga's pastimes. The sound of kirtana covered the entire
world and the demigods showered flowers from the heavens. Gandharvas and
Kinnaras remarked with amazement, "Who is that extraordinary person who has
suddenly manifested this most sublime and beautiful kirtana? Even we are not
familiar with this type of singing. It appears that the dance, music and
instruments have all become personified by his singing. Some of the devotees of
Caitanya have this type of extraordinary power. All the devotees of Sri Caitanya
Mahaprabhu are worshipable by even the demigods and goddesses." Saying this,
they accepting the guise of human beings, came before Narottama and fell at his
feet. Thus from that very special day the super-excellent kirtana of Sri
Narottama dasa Thakura was inaugurated. On that same day Balarama Vipra and
others happily took initiation from Sri Thakura.
With a satisfied heart, Sri Thakura Mahasaya began to serve Gauracandra and
Laksmi Visnupriya. He appointed Balarama Vipra and others to take charge of the
Deities' service. As ordered in a dream, he also installed five more Deities.
After this he began to feel anxious about not having heard from Srinivasa
Acarya for so long. He wanted to find out some news, but thought, "Without his
permission, how can I send anyone to see him? Yet no one has come from
Yajigrama in such a long time. Now, I am at a loss as to what to do." Just as
he was thinking in this way a man suddenly arrived from Yajigrama. With great
relief Thakura Mahasaya eagerly inquired about events there. The devotee
replied, "Everything is fine there, but Acarya Thakura is always thinking of
you and missing your association. He regularly visits Sri Khanda and
Kantakanagara, and has also gone to Navadvipa. One day when he was in Khanda,
Sri Sarkara Thakura spoke with him and again requested that he marry. This time
he could not disobey Thakura. Thus he married and settled at Yajigrama, where
many scholars and learned persons regularly visit. Now Ramacandra, a learned
son of Sri Ciranjiva Sena of Khanda, has become the disciple of Acarya, and
many others have also accepted initiation from him.
He has also successfully distributed all of the books of the Gosvamis. He sent
a message to Sri Vrndavana, and one man brought a reply along with more books
written by Sri Jiva Gosvami. Acarya has already distributed these new books
everywhere.
Recently Srinivasa received a letter from Navadvipa, carrying devastating news.
Many of the Lord's associates from Santipura and the surrounding areas, who
were suffering intensely in the fire of separation, have now left this world.
Hearing about the demise of Sri Sarkara Thakura and Sri Dasa Gadadhara,
Srinivasa Acarya sank deep in the ocean of despair. I cannot describe his state
of mind. Sometimes we were afraid of his life. One day being unable to bear the
pain of separation, he left for Vrndavana without telling anyone.
The Gosvamis were overjoyed to have Srinivasa's company. They happily sat him
down and inquired about his well-being and listened intently to the full account
of carrying the manuscripts to Gauda. In this way they happily spent four or
five days together.
Around that time, Sri Ramacandra Sena came there to meet Srinivasa Acarya. When
the Gosvamis were informed of Ramacandra's scholarly capabilities, they
conferred upon him the title of "Kaviraja." The Gosvamis eagerly listened as
Ramacandra gave a full account of Srinivasa Acarya's marriage.
Thereafter Sri Jiva Gosvami and the others gladly handed over more books to
Srinivasa Acarya, appointed four Vrajavasis to accompany him, and bade him
farewell. Sri Gopala Bhatta, Lokanatha, and everyone there was extremely sad to
see him leave. Srinivasa quickly returned to Gauda and then went to Visnupura
to relieve the king. I heard that he would be coming soon to Yajigrama, so

[p.29]
I immediately came here to inform you."
During the course of this conversation, two messengers suddenly arrived with
another letter for Narottama from Sri Acarya and Narottama happily read aloud,
"I left my house, along with my followers, and went to Kancanagaria where
I initiated two devotees, who are the bearers of this letter. These two
brothers, Sridasa and Gokulananda, are the sons of Dvija Haridasa, a prominent
follower of Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. Being ordered by their father, they
accepted initiation from Me. Yesterday I left Kancanagaria and started for
Vudhuri."
Reading this, Narottama exclaimed, "Oh what a wonderful morning for me," and
happily escorted the two messengers to the temple of Sri Gaura. There he
introduced them to Balarama Pujari, who gladly brought them mahaprasada.
Thakura Mahasaya then went to inspect whether all the preparations for the
forthcoming festival were ready or not. He was happy to find that all the
go-downs were full of commodities. He then engaged various persons to specific
assignments for further preparations. The next morning he left, along with
Devidasa, Gokula and Gauranga and started for Vudhuri.
When Narottama reached Vudhuri someone rushed ahead and announced his arrival to
Sri Acarya, who happily hurried out of the house and found Narottama standing
there. Narottama fell at his feet, and Sri Acarya Thakura embraced him warmly.
He then introduced Narottama to Ramacandra and the other devotees.
Sitting in a quiet place they discussed many topics; Srinivasa explained how he
had met Ramacandra and initiated him, how his marriage had occurred, how
Ramacandra received the title "Kaviraja," his journey from Yajigrama to Vudhuri
and how he conferred the title of "Kaviraja" upon Govinda. He then inquired
about Narottama's well being, and Narottama gradually explained how Sri Santosa
Raya and others had became his disciples, how he rescued the Deity of Sri
Gaurahari and arranged to have five more Deities carved and how he was making
preparations for the forthcoming great festival. Narottama said, "As soon as I
received your letter, I decided to hold the festival on the full-moon day of
Phalguna." Thereafter they sat together and compiled a list of devotees to
invite to the festival and immediately sent out the invitation letter to all
the devotees of Sri Gaurangamandala. Narottama also wrote a letter inviting
Syamananda from Utkala. Sri Acarya and Narottama then sat together discussing
privately. Later, Sri Acarya put Ramacandra under the care of Narottama.
Within a few days, news of Sri Acarya, Narottama and Ramacandra spread like
wildfire. In every corner people were speaking about them: "They have mercifully
appeared in this world to save the fallen souls from this hellish material
existence." Another person said, "Although three separate persons, they are so
deeply united that they appear to be one."
After four days had passed Sri Acarya permitted Narottama to return to Kheturi
and instructed Ramacandra and others to accompany him. Upon arriving in Kheturi
they immediately went for darsana of Sri Gauranga. There they happily met the
disciples of Thakura Mahasaya, who were all abodes of transcendental qualities.
Thereafter they inquired about the preparations for the festival and were
pleased to find an enormous collection of the necessary commodities. Sri Thakura
Mahasaya arranged separate private houses for Ramacandra and the others, where
they all waited anxiously for the arrival of Sri Acarya.
Shortly thereafter, when Sri Acarya Thakura, along with Govinda and other
devotees, arrived in Kheturi, a wonderful scene ensued as all the Vaisnavas ran
out to greet them. They happily escorted Sri Acarya to a beautiful house and
then took him for darsana of Sri Gauranga. Upon seeing the Deity along with His
consort, Laksmi-Visnupriya, Acarya was filled with ecstatic love. He then saw
the other five Deities and was equally overjoyed to see each one. Sri Acarya

[p.30]
then inspected the go-downs, but his mind was constantly distracted by thoughts
of Sri Syamananda Prabhu. As he was thinking in this way, someone suddenly
announced that Syamananda had just arrived from Utkala.
Hearing this, Acarya and his men dashed to welcome him. When Syamananda and his
companions entered the house of Sri Acarya, Syamananda could not check his
emotions. They embraced, soaking each other with their tears. Acarya then asked
about Syamananda's well being. The same emotional scene occurred when Narottama
arrived there. Sri Thakura Mahasaya then introduced Syamananda to all the
Vaisnavas, and Sri Syamananda in turn introduced Rasikananda and his other
devotees. Sridasa, Gokulananda, Vyasa Cakravarti, Ramacandra and Govinda
Kaviraja were extremely happy to meet Cattaraja, Ramakrsna, Kumuda and the
others. Narottama then took Ramacandra and Syamananda to a beautiful house and
said to Rasikananda affectionately, "My dear Rasikananda, try to manage
everything smoothly and peacefully. Be very careful to look after the guests so
they do not experience any inconvenience." Rasikananda listened humbly with
folded hands and remained quiet. His humility charmed the heart of Narottama.
Thakura Mahasaya and Ramacandra returned to Sri Acarya's place and sent Sri
Govinda Kaviraja to take Syamananda to the temple of Sri Gaurasundara.
Syamananda was ecstatic to see the beautiful form of the Lord and requested to
see the other five Deities. Govinda also showed Syamananda the store rooms. Sri
Rasikananda, Purusottama, Sri Kisora and other devotees had brought many items
from home to contribute for the festival. Thus their gifts were added to the
huge stock. In this way the commodities increased and the store rooms bulged
with goods. Syamananda then went to Sri Acarya's place and together they
relished discussions about Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu. In this way that wonderful
day came to a close.
In the morning everyone completed their daily duties and began to wonder why
Sri Jahnava Devi had not arrived in Kheturi yet. As they were thinking in this
way, a brahmana arrived and reported that Sri Jahnava Iswari had just crossed
the River Padmavati. Everyone happily scrambled towards the bank of the river
to greet Sri Iswari. The news rapidly spread and people came running from all
directions.
After bowing to her feet, Acarya asked about her well-being. She replied, "Upon
receiving your letter we were all extremely anxious to come to Kheturi at once."
At that time when Jahnava had received the invitation to Kheturi, Krsnadasa
Atyudara, the elder brother of Suryadasa Sarkhela, was also present there.
Hearing about the forthcoming festival, Srila Raghupati Upadhyaya, Murari,
Caitanya, Jnanadasa, Manohara, Kamalakara Pippalai, Sri Jiva Pandita, Madhava
Acarya, Nrsimha Caitanya Dasa, Kanai, Sankara, Sri Gaurangadasa, Vrndavana, Sri
Minaketana, Ramadasa, Nakari, Sri Balarama and others, bowed to the feet of
the two Iswaris and humbly said, "We would also like to go to Kheturi." Hearing
this Sri Jahnava happily requested Sri Paramesvara dasa to begin preparations
for their journey immediately.
On the day of Sri Iswari's departure, many Vaisnavas from distant places came to
see Sri Iswari and when they came to know about the festival, they also were
eager to go along with her. They enthusiastically rushed back to their houses
and began preparing for the journey. For this reason the entire party was held
up for some time.
At the time of their departure they suddenly heard a deep voice speaking to them
from the sky saying, "Srinivasa and Narottama are extremely dear to Me and are
empowered by Me to distribute divine love. I am completely bound by their love.
In Kheturi you will all see Me dance in the sankirtana along with My companions.
The power of My love will drive the three worlds mad and no one will escape.
Your journey will certainly be a great success. Everyone is eagerly waiting for
you. From Kheturi, you should go to Vrndavana, and when you return from
Vrndavana you should distribute pure devotional love to everyone."

[p.31]
Upon hearing this voice, Sri Iswari wept with joy, and all the great
personalities assembled there were overcome with happiness. Sri Jahnava consoled
Sri Vasu devi, Ganga and Viracandra and, chanting the holy names of Gaura
Nityananda, she and her party began their journey by boat to Kheturi. Meanwhile,
news of Sri Iswari's future trip to Vraja via Kheturi spread everywhere.
After some distance, they stopped the boat and Sri Iswari visited the house of
a fortunate merchant who was always absorbed in the glories of Nityananda
Prabhu. His love overflowed to have Iswari in his house. Favoring them, Sri
Iswari decided to take rest for the day in his house. Raghunatha Khaja, son of
Bhagavan and favorite disciple of Jagadisa Pandita, came to meet Iswari at that
time.
Early the next morning they started for Amvika, where Sri Hrdaya Caitanya
greeted Sri Iswari. Seeing the Deities there of Nitai Caitanyacandra, she was
filled with ecstatic emotions, and thereafter she and her companions took
prasada. Sri Jahnava reported everything to Hrdaya Caitanya who also decided to
go to Kheturi. In the meantime, Sri Caitanyadasa, son of Sri Vansivadana, came
to meet Sri Iswari and also decided to go to Kheturi. At that time one man came
from Santipura and reported that Sri Acyutananda, son of Advaita Prabhu, was
practically dead due to the unbearable misery of separation from the Lord. His
mother, Sri Sita, ordered him to go to Kheturi and thus they planned to start
in the morning. Hearing this, Sri Iswari became so happy that she immediately
instructed him to tell Acyutananda that he should travel along with her party.
Sri Iswari and her companions happily spent that night in the house of Hrdaya
Caitanya Pandita. In the morning she observed Sri Mangala Arati and dedicated
herself to the feet of Nitai Caitanya. She then started for Navadvipa.
Reaching the outskirts of Navadvipa, she began to weep thinking of the wonderful
pastimes of the Lord. When the favorite associates of Caitanya Mahaprabhu who
were still alive in Navadvipa heard that Sri Jahnava had come to their place,
they all rushed happily to meet her. As she got down from the palanquin all the
Vaisnavas of Navadvipa bowed to her feet, and she introduced her companions to
the Navadvipa devotees. How can that glorious meeting be described? Many of the
devotees were bowing at each other's feet, while others embraced one another,
and still others began to loudly sing the glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu.
A long time passed before they were capable of checking their ecstatic loving
feelings.
Eventually Pandita Sripati, brother of Srivasa Pandita, suggested to Sri Madhava
Acarya and others, "I think we should take bath here in the Ganges." Everyone
was delighted by the proposal and rushed to take their bath. Meanwhile, Sripati
quickly went to Navadvipa and returned with many items. Sri Jahnava Iswari
cheerfully fed them and afterwards took something herself.
The party then entered into Navadvipa and went to the house of Srivasa. Advaita
Prabhu's son, Sri Gopala, brother of Acyuta, Sri Kanu Pandita, Visnudasa
Mahasaya, Vanamali dasa and other great Vaisnavas came to greet them. Everyone
was jubilant to meet one another. Srimati Iswari privately spoke to Acyutananda,
explaining about the festival. Delighted, he immediately announced to his
followers about the upcoming Kheturi festival. Quickly the news spread
throughout Navadvipa and everyone was eager to attend the festival. Afterwards
they all met in the house of Srivasa and took their meals. Meanwhile people
from all over Navadvipa came running to see the meeting of the Vaisnavas.
A long time passed joyfully in this way until eventually the devotees went to
bed.
Early in the morning they resumed their journey. Upon arriving in Akaihata, they
went to the house of Krsnadasa, the great singer, who quickly arranged food for
them. He also prepared himself for going to Kheturi.
The next morning they again traveled on until they reached Kantakanagara.

[p.32]
Krsnadasa Thakura was the first to be informed of their arrival and immediately
came forward to greet them and brought them to his house. Very shortly
thereafter, Sri Raghunandana and his companions arrived there, then Vaninath
and Sivananda came along with others. Vallabha, Caitanya dasa, Bhagavatacarya,
Nartaka (dancer) Gopala, Jita Misra, Raghu Misra, Kasinath Pandita, Uddhava,
Sri Nayanananda Misra and other favorite followers of Caitanya Mahaprabhu also
came there. Everyone was overjoyed to meet one another and overwhelmed upon
seeing the beauty of Sri Gauranga and Dasa Gadadhara. Afterwards they tearfully
went to see the place where the Lord accepted sannyasa. A long time passed
before they were able to calm themselves, eventually they went to take bath in
the Ganges.
Meanwhile Sri Yadunandana collected many varieties of sweet for them and after
offering them to Sri Gaurangacandra, placed separate plates of sweets in
separate rooms. After coming back from the Ganges they very gladly took
mahaprasada. On that day, Sri Jahnava Iswari in a happy mood went to cook for
the devotees. She cooked various items and then offered them to Sri
Gaurangacandra, who very happily accepted them. After some time, she
affectionately distributed prasada to all the devotees. Everyone delightedly
relished the prasada which tasted like nectar. Afterwards Sri Iswari took some
prasada. After her, Sri Yadunandana and others ate.
Yadunandana, being extremely moved by remembrance of his spiritual master, Dasa
Gadadhara, began preparing for the trip to Kheturi. He carefully instructed the
priest of the temple to be attentive to the service of Sri Gauranga. By the
evening all the preparations were complete.
In the meantime, all the mahantas gathered in the courtyard of Sri Gauranga.
After observing Sri Gauranga's arati ceremony, they started sankirtana. In this
way most of the night passed in glorification of Krsna. Late at night they took
a short nap. In the morning, after offering their obeisances at the feet of
Gauracandra, they started out for Kheturi and very soon they crossed the River
Padmavati. Sri Iswari sent a messenger to inform Acarya Thakura of their
arrival. Excited and happy, Sri Acarya, Sri Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda all
stood together, shining as brilliantly as the sun, expectantly staring at the
path waiting for her arrival. Seeing these three exalted souls waiting on the
path, Sri Iswari could not contain her emotions and got down from her palanquin,
while Srinivasa and others ran to her and fell at her feet. Srinivasa and the
other devotees then bowed to the feet of Sri Acyutananda and the rest of the
devotees. Everyone was overwhelmed with intense loving sentiments - someone held
on to Srinivasa crying, and someone else embraced Narottama, another devotee
could not let Ramacandra out of his embrace, while another person soaked Sri
Gokulananda with his tears. One devotee stretched out his arms to greet Sridasa,
and another affectionately embraced Syamananda and Govinda Kaviraja.
When the party entered into Kheturi proper, the entire village was submerged in
an ocean of happiness. With great care Acarya Thakura escorted the devotees to
separate houses and appointed Ramacandra Kaviraja to the service of Raghunatha
Acarya and his associates. He appointed Syamananda to the service of Sri Hrdaya
Caitanya. Sri Nrsimha Kaviraja was appointed to serve Sri Caitanyadasa and some
others, and Sri Vyasa Acarya took care of Sripati, Srinidhi Pandita and their
associates. He asked Sri Vallabhi Kanta to serve Krsnadasa and other devotees
from Akaihata, and Sri Govinda Kaviraja took charge of serving Sri Raghunandana
and his companions. Ramakrsna, Kumuda and their associates were requested to
look after Vaninatha, Jita Misra and others. Kaviraja Bhagavan was put in the
service of Sri Yadunandana Cakravarti, and Sri Gopiramana and others were
appointed to the service of the other Vaisnavas. Srinivasa arranged separate
stocks of food for separate houses, and Sri Acarya Thakura and Thakura Mahasaya
oversaw everything to assure that all was executed properly.
Simply hearing about the arrival of all these great mahantas in Kheturi can

[p.33]
fulfill all the desires of the listeners.
So hear attentively as I, Narahari, narrate this Narottama Vilasa.

[p.34]
THE SEVENTH VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acarya and
all the associates of the Lord. Please bestow your mercy upon this fallen soul.
All glories to the merciful listeners. Kindly listen attentively to this
narration.
As news of the Kheturi festival spread throughout the country, everywhere people
were heard speaking about it: "Oh brother, Sri Khetari has become beautified by
the association of the devotees. It is now the most fortunate village on the
earth and is the abode of eternal joy." Everyone in Sri Kheturi; men, women,
aged and even the children could not check their tears upon seeing the assembly
of devotees. Someone said, "Many more Vaisnavas have arrived today, they look
as effulgent as the brilliant sun. " Another person commented, "By the power of
these Vaisnavas even the atheistic offenders feel compelled to utter the name of
Krsna." Someone else remarked, "Sri Santosa is certainly the most fortunate
King, just see how carefully he has arranged accommodations for all the
devotees." Others said, "The King is very attentive to the well-being of all
mankind." Someone else commented, "The flower-men have been told to supply
beautiful garlands, while others were requested to prepare sandalwood paste.
The instrumentalists have been ordered to begin playing on the Sukla Pancami day
of Phalguna." Everywhere bustling preparations for the festival were under way,
as people chattered excitedly in anticipation: "The king has invited all the
neighbouring kings to the abhiseka ceremony. Tomorrow is the auspicious full
moon day, exactly the appropriate time for the Deities to be installed in the
temple." Other's said, "Thakura Mahasaya has transformed this land. Previously
the area was overrun with wicked thieves and rogues who knew nothing about
religion. Neither could they understand what the results of their inauspicious
behaviour would be. These ignorant people were accustomed to severing the heads
of goats, lambs and buffalos. Some of them were even so degraded that they would
dance with the heads of men fixed on the top of their swords. Such persons were
accustomed to indulge in intoxication and illicit sex. Yet, by the influence of
Narottama, even such atrocious persons have become exempt from the results of
their sinful activities." In this way, the glories of Narottama were sung
continually throughout the town. People came from far and wide carrying all
varieties of commodities for the imminent festival. Everyone who entered into
Kheturi was immediately freed from all distress. The association of Sri Thakura
Mahasaya soothed the hearts of all.
In the evening one devotee told Acarya that many kholas and kartalas had been
made and stocked in a suitable place, and requested that he come to inspect
them. Sri Acarya, along with Gauranga, Gokula and Devidasa happily went to
inspect the instruments. They first worshipped the instruments while chanting
the names of Gaura Nityananda. Thereafter they went to see Sri Iswari and
informed her about the abhiseka ceremony.
In the morning, when all the mahantas had finished their morning duties, Sri
Acarya and Thakura Mahasaya came to them and offered them beautiful new clothes.
Meanwhile, King Sri Santosa Raya noted with pleasure that all the arrangements
for the opening ceremony were complete. The gorgeous canopy which had been hung
in the courtyard increased the charm of the festival arena. Many seats were
arranged for the mahantas under the canopy, and the wide courtyard of the temple
was tastefully decorated with innumerable banana trees, coconuts, flowers,
mango twigs, and pitchers filled with water. Seeing that the arrangements were
complete, Sri Acarya personally informed Her Holiness Jahnava mata, and she came
and sat in her private seat. At the request of Srinivasa, all the mahantas took
their seats. The atmosphere in the courtyard was most pleasing, as the mahantas
chatted mildly amongst themselves. Sri Acarya then requested their permission to
begin the auspicious abhiseka ceremony.

[p.35]
Having received the blessings of all, Srinivasa performed the bathing ceremony
and other rites swiftly, in accordance with the instructions given by Srila
Rupa Gosvami. After completing the bathing, Srinivasa revealed the names of the
Deities as had been prophesied in his dream. He then placed the Deities on the
throne in the following order: Sri Gauranga, Vallabhi Kanta, Sri Braj Mohan,
Sri Krsna, Sri Radha Kanta, and Sri Radha Ramana. He worshipped the Lords,
performed arati and offered their Lordships sumptuous food. The bhoga was
removed after some time and the place was thoroughly cleansed. Srinivasa then
placed a garland around the neck of each Deity. He then gave the offered
garlands and sandalwood paste to the mahantas, who happily wore the garlands
and smeared their bodies with the paste while gleefully shouting out the glories
of the Lord.
Meanwhile the musical instruments played melodiously and it appeared that the
evils of the world were minimized simply by that sound. Permission was then
given to Sri Thakura Mahasaya to begin sankirtana. His heart full of joyful
anticipation, Sri Thakura told Devidasa to get ready. Devidasa, Vallabha,
Gokula and Gauranga quickly gathered their instruments and entered the
courtyard. Standing in front of Devidasa, Narottama's appearance charmed the
hearts of all. The tilak on his forehead and the tulsi beads around his neck
appeared to glitter brilliantly. Narottama called out to Gaura, Nitai, Advaita
and others, then bowed to all the mahantas. Smiling brightly, he began sankirtan
in a soft voice, accompanied by the kartals. His body was drenched in sweat
mixed with tears of joy. The sound of drums joined in, mingling with the voices
of the singers, creating celestial music. Unable to control himself,
Raghunandana began to chant the glories of the Lord at the top of his voice,
roaring like an enraged lion. At that moment, Sri Acarya gave Raghunandana
garlands and sandalwood paste which he at once touched to the drums and cymbals.
Totally immersed in the ecstasy of transcendental love, Raghunandana smeared
the body of Narottama with the sandalwood paste, garlanded him with flowers and
embraced him warmly. He also extended the same treatment to the other devotees
present. They all bowed at the feet of Raghunandana and started to sing the
preamble, beginning at a low pitch and gradually increasing until finally
the atmosphere became so surcharged that everyone marvelled at the occasion.
Charmed by the marvellous voice of Narottama, the mahantas commented that
Narottama was certainly directly empowered by the Lord to act as the custodian
of transcendental music. Thinking in this way, they all embraced Narottama and
began to dance with him jubilantly. The sandalwood paste on their bodies and
the flowing garlands added extra luster to the occasion. At this point, Gauranga
and His associates could no longer remain unmoved and thus personally appeared
at the scene. The atmosphere was suddenly surcharged with emotion and the
devotees entered into a state of trance as they beheld the appearance of
Sri Caitanya, Lord Nityananda, Advaita, Srinivasa, Gadadhara, Murari, Svarupa,
Haridasa, Vakresvara, Jagadisa, Gauridasa. The son of Saci began to dance
ecstatically with Sri Acyutananda and the others. Similarly, Sri Nityananda
danced with Narottama, Sri Advaita danced with Ramacandra and others, while
Pandita Gadadhara danced with Srinivasa Acarya. The whole assembly thus became
caught up in the mood of great ecstasy and innumerable associates of the Lord
including Srivas Pandit, Murari Gupta, Svarupa, Haridasa, Suklambara Brahmacari,
Vasudeva Datta, Vakresvara Pandit, Gadadhara Dasa, Mukunda, Narahari, Gauri Dasa
Pandita, Nakula Brahmacari, Jagadisa, Sujadasa, Acarya Nandana, Srinatha,
Mahesha, Jodu, Madhusudana, Govinda, Madhava Basurai, Ramananda, Vijaya,
Dhananjaya Datta, Sanatana, Rupa, Raghunatha, Kasisvara also began to dance.
It seemed that the visible and invisible had convened at that place as everyone
sang and clapped their hands along with the throbbing beating of the drums.
Glancing in every direction the Lord showered His love on all present and in
reciprocation the devotes chanted the names of Sri Krsna Caitanya. The promises
which the Lord had made to Narottama in his dream were now realized to the
amazement of the devotees. Who can understand the inconceivable potency of the

[p.36]
Lord?
Suddenly the Lord and His associates disappeared from the scene, and immediately
everyone's trance was broken. The devotees lamented piteously, feeling intense
separation from Gaura, Nityananda, Advaita, Srivasa, Gadadhara, Murari,
Haridasa, Vakresvara Pandita, Narahari, Gauradasa and the others. Sri
Acyutananda and others began to ask themselves if indeed it had actually taken
place or whether they had simply been dreaming. Narottama, Srinivasa,
Ramacandra, Syamananda and others fell to the ground. Grief stricken, they
cried out to the Lord. Even the non-believers who attended the festival simply
out of curiosity or seeking some entertainment or fun, left the area as changed
men. The brahmana Baninath was first to regain consciousness. Seeing the
devotees lying in various stages of collapse, he and others immediately began
to nurse the devotees and gradually they returned to external consciousness.
Her Holiness Jahnavi Devi told Narottama and Srinivasa that she fully
appreciated their ? and advised them to hold it. She then told them that
according to the scriptures it was time to play fagu, with coloured powder.
Srinivasa and Narottama then went to meet all the other mahantas who praised
the two acknowledging them as eternal associates of the Lord. Sri Nityananda
expressed His satisfaction by stating that neither He, nor anyone else present,
would ever forget the wonderful experience which the festival afforded them.
Srinivasa and Narottama then invited the mahantas to participate in the fagu
play and this idea was greeted with everyone's full approval. Sri Santosh Rai
brought pots filled with different kinds of scented fagu. Narottama, with the
help of Ramacandra, gave the first pot of fagu to Her Holiness. Together they
entered the temple and placed it on the body of the Lord. Then Sri Acyutananda,
Raghunandana, Srinidhi, Kasinatha, Hrdaya Caitanya, Jodu and others put fagu on
the body of Sri Gauranga, Radha Kanta, Sri Vallabha Kanta, Sri Braj Mohan, Sri
Radha Raman. While playing some of the devotees recited poetry, while others
chanted the glories of the Lord's Vrndavana and Navadvipa pastimes. In this way
everyone was totally absorbed in chanting, dancing, reciting the Lord's glories
and engaging in the fagu festival. Thousands of people joined in and the fagu
thrown about was sufficient to cover the sky. This continued until evening when
everyone attended the arati of the Lord and chanted His glories. After some
time they all assembled in the courtyard where Sri Acarya carefully performed
the necessary rituals observing the birthday of the Lord. To mark the occasion
the Vaisnavas conducted all night kirtanas to the accompaniment of various
percussion instruments.
In the morning everyone performed their morning ablutions. Her Holiness bathed
with tepid water and said her daily prayers. Then along with Srinivas she went
along to the kitchen to make sure it was stocked with all the necessary
requirements. Smiling, she said to Srinivasa, "I wanted you to know the
ingredients needed for the cooking and now I see that everything is ready. How
did you know that I intended to cook everything with my own hands?" Saying this
she sat down on a stool and began to prepare everything very carefully. Very
quickly she prepared rice as well as various vegetable preparations and placed
them with great care in trays and pots. She then presented these foodstuffs as
an offering to the Lord.
Absorbed in ecstatic devotion, she watched lovingly as the Deities of Gauranga,
Vallabha Kanta, Radha Mohana, Radha Kanta, Radha Krsna and Braj Mohana all
partook of her mouthwatering preparations with great relish. After this, as was
the custom, she then came out and closed the door. After waiting for some time
she again entered the sanctum of the temple, removed the preparations, offered
water for washing the mouths of the Lords and then offered the betel nuts.
After this offering Srinivasa distributed the offered foodstuffs among the
mahantas, who ate it all with great satisfaction. Next they all went to the
Rajbhoga arati of the Lord, after which the performing priest presented them

[p.37]
all with garlands of Tulsi leaves. The priest then placed the Deities to rest
on soft beds and covered Their bodies with beautiful soft cloth and began to
fan them with a yak tail fan. After doing so for some time he then came out,
closed the door and offered his obeisances on the ground while reciting prayers.
Thereafter Srinivasa invited everyone to take prasada in the courtyard of the
temple and then he cleaned the dust from the area and all the mahants sat in
a circle. One devotee provided the banana leaf plates, while other devotees
came around with salt, clarified butter, curd and milk. Her Holiness was very
pleased to see such an assembly of devotees and ordered that the prasada be
served promptly. The preparations included fried leafy vegetables, rice, soup,
sour soup and condensed milk, and everyone was served to their full
satisfaction. The aroma and the taste of the food was so tantalising that
everyone ate much more than they needed and Sri Acyutananda remarked, "I cannot
understand how I ate so much." Sripati, Srinidhi and Baninath replied that it
was all by the grace of Her Holiness that this was possible. Sri Raghunandana
and others remarked that they would never again receive the same pleasure from
eating as they had received on this auspicious occasion.
Srinivasa and Narottama then went to Her Holiness and requested, "You have
worked very hard, now it is our desire that you sit down and take prasada."
She replied, "My great desire is that I want to feed you all first and then
I shall eat. For my sake please go and sit in the courtyard along with the
others." Sri Acarya and others then went and sat in the courtyard and they were
served the feast in the same way as was before mentioned. Wit great affection,
Her Holiness personally served prasada thus making everyone eat to their heart's
content. As the devotees happily ate they talked amongst themselves happily:
"This is heavenly cooking, has anyone ever eaten such a fried leafy vegetable in
all their life?" In this way they praised her culinary expertise and when they
finished Raghunandana and a few others went to retire. Srinivasa then ate in
the company of Narottama, Ramacandra, Govinda dasa, Rama Krsna, Mukunda,
Gokulananda, Vyasa, Syamananda, Sri Krsna Vallabha, Devidasa, Bhagavan, Nrsimha,
Gokula, Karnapura, Kishore, Rasikananda, Gauranga Thakura, Gopiramu and others.
After finishing, they all washed their hands and took betel nuts. Sri Acarya
then made a seat for Her Holiness and she happily took a small quantity of each
of the items that had been prepared. Then with the help of Syamananda, Sri
Acarya fed many other men and finally Balarama the priest and a few others were
the last to partake.
After eating, Her Holiness bathed in tepid water in a private place and her
personal attendant, a brahmana lady, wiped her body gently with a fine cloth.
Jahnava mata had a slim figure and a golden complexion and was overcome by
intense feelings of separation from her beloved Lord. Another lady brought Her
Holiness a set of clean clothes. After changing and washing her mouth, Her
Holiness took some betel nut while sitting on a sheet on the ground. As tears
of gratitude rolled down her cheeks, she affectionately told Narottama, "Today
I have made my eating complete." Srinivasa and Syamananda also came before
Jahnava mata and she said in a sweet voice, "We don't think we should stay here
any longer. I consider it best to start for Vrndavana tomorrow morning. To this
Sri Acarya replied, "Though it pains us to hear this, I have nothing to reply.
I know that there is nothing I can say to change your decision. The festival
has now come to close so how can I object to the journey." Her Holiness simply
smiled in reply to this remark. Then, on Srinivasa's request, she lay down on
the sheet to rest for awhile.
Srinivasa, Narottama and Syamananda went to another place where they also took
some rest. Thereafter they proceeded to the residence of Sri Acyutananda where
all the mahantas were assembled and discussing topics of Sri Krsna's life.
Pleased to see their three hosts, the mahantas requested Sri Acarya, "We are
sorry but we must now beg your permission to go. We would like to depart." The

[p.38]
Acarya replied, "What you have decided cannot be changed. If early tomorrow
morning you arise and prepare your own food that will be convenient for us."
The mahants were amused by his suggestion and agreed to it and then returned to
their respective lodgings.
Sri Acarya, along with Narottama and Syamananda went to the abode of the Lord
along with Sri Santosh Rai and others and Sri Acarya told them everything.
He who derives pleasure from hearing these pastimes will no doubt have all his
desires fulfilled.
Please listen attentively to Narottama Vilasa as told by Narahari.

[p.39]
THE EIGHTH VILASA
Glory to Gaura, Nityananda, Advaita and others. Be kind to this poor soul.
Glory to the merciful listeners.
At the time of evening ceremony of waving light before Sri Gauracandra all the
mahantas came to the temple. They became very happy to observe the ceremony.
The priest gave them offered garlands and Tulsi. Then they began sankirtana.
After that they went to their own rooms. Many items of food were offered to
Prabhu. After Prabhu's eating, Sri Acarya took prasadam for Iswari and then
distributed that separately and served to every room. All of them became very
happy to eat the tasteful prasadam. Sri Acarya told everybody to bless Santosa
Raya who had arranged everything by giving the full financial help. They also
blessed him. Being happy Acarya Mahasaya with his companions came to the temple
of Prabhu. Sri Acarya, Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda ate some prasadam. Again
Sri Acarya cautioned those whom he had engaged in the service of the mahantas.
As it was late at night, they all entered into their rooms and went to sleep.
In the morning, they completed their morning duties. Now the cooks of the
mahantas took their baths first, did their `Anhika' and going round the Tulsi.
Then they entered into the separate kitchens. Ramacandra Kaviraja with others
supplied the necesary commodities to the cooks in each kitchen. Then the cooks
began to cook varieties of items very gladly. At the time of cooking, Ramacandra
and others used to be standing cautiously beside the kitchens if any cook needed
any help.
Sri Santosa Raya was engaged in arranging separate containers decorated with
betel leaves, gold and silver coins, beautiful silk dreses what he would offer
to the mahantas. Sri Santosa Raya went to Sri Iswari and asked for her
permission. Then he went to all the mahantas and offered them those things one
by one. They all wore the silk cloths and sat for doing Anhika. Santosa Raya
gave beautiful cloth and coins to each and everyone who came with the mahantas.
At the time Acarya came to that place and became very glad to see the charity
of Santosa Raya. In the meantime the priest informed that he had arranged
prasadam separately. Sri Acarya requested them to take seats and began to serve
food to them. The mahantas sat in rows and became very happy to eat prasadam.
In the courtyard of Sri Jahnava Iswari's house, some Vaisnavas took their seats
for taking meals. They were Krsnadasa Sarakhela, Madhava Acarya, Raghupati
Upadhyaya, Krsna Bhaktavarya, Sri Minaketana, Ramadasa, Mahidhara, Murari,
Caitanya, Jnanadasa, Manohara, Kamalakara Pippalai, Nrsimha Caitanya, Sri Jiva
Pandita, Sri Gaurangadasa, Vrndavana, Sri Sankara, Kanai, Nakari, Krsnadasa,
Paramesvaradasa, Balarama, Damodara and Mukunda. I am giving the names of these
who sat with Sri Acyutananda for eating. They were Sri Gopala, younger brother
of Acyutananda, Sri Kanu Pandita, Visnudasa, Narayana, Banamali dasa, Sri
Ananta, Janardana, Sri Mahava, Lokanatha Bhagavatacarya. Raghunathacarya with
his companions, Sri Caitanyadasa, son of Sri Vansivadana, with his companions,
Sri Hrdaya Caitanya with his companions. All were enjoying the prasadam by
sitting in their own rooms. What a beautiful scene there, all were enjoying
prasadam delightfully. In another room were eating Sripati, Srinidhi, Krsnadasa,
Sri Sanjaya, Kasinatha, Mukunda, Paramananda, Sekhar Pandita, Krsnadasa Vaisya,
Subhananda, Sri Gopala Acarya, Kavicandra Kirtaniya and Sasthivara.
Krsnadasa of Akaihata with his companions were eating in their place most
gladly. Vaninatha, Sivananda, Vallabha Caitanya, Nartaka Gopala, Bhagavatacarya
Jita Misra, Raghu, Sri Uddhava, Kasinatha, Sri Narayana Misra and Sri Mangala
sat in one place and were eating all along very happily.
Sri Raghunandana, Sulocana and others were eating in their room. Sri Yadunandana
Cakravarty and his companions were taking prasadam by siting in their own
place. Sri Acarya and Sri Thakura Mahasaya were inspecting their eating very
carefully. When all the mahantas finished their eating, they were offered water
for washing their mouths. After that they took prasadam. At last the priest fed

[p.40]
all the Vaisnava guests there. Even the untouchable persons also got the
highest respect there. At long last, Acarya and Thakura Mahasaya took their
prasadam.
Who has witnessed such a big festival in his life? People used to say that they
had never seen such a great festival. Some persons said that how it was possible
for a human being to perform such a festival which was even totally impossible
for the gods. Some persons said that those who had performed this festival, they
were no human beings because all the devotees of Sri Caitanya were even
worshipped by the gods. Some persons said that they had even moved the heretics
by the topics on Krsna. Above all, the heretics had eaten the left over food of
the Vaisnavas and prayed to them to rescue them from damnation. Some persons
said that Narottama would rescue all the heretics from damnation and there would
be not a single heretic in this country. In this way, the people began to
glorify Narottama.
Now listen, Sri Acarya after taking some rest, told Thakura Mahasaya privately,
"They will take their leave in the morning. They will take their baths after
crossing Padmavati. We should pack some food for them, so that they can eat
after bath." Hearing this, Thakura Mahasaya did not lose time. He quickly
ordered to prepare food. After food had been ready, he first of all offered
them to Prabhu and then packed them separately. He reported Acarya that
everything was ready but all these preparations could be done by the evening.
Here all the mahantas being eager to observe the waving light ceremony came out
of their rooms and gathered in the courtyard of Prabhu. The priest offered them
garlands, and Tulsi. After the ceremony, the mahantas started sankirtana.
Within a while, the river of nectar began to flow there and all the mahantas
began to swim in the ocean of love. They could not control themselves and fell
on the ground out of ecstasy. Their beautiful bodies became smeared with dust.
After a long time, they observed the Sayana Arati of Prabhu. Again the priest
gave garlands and Tulsi to them. Then the mahantas returned to their own
places. Acarya with Narotama supplied prasadam separately to each room.
He told the mahantas, "Tomorrow Khetari will sink into utter darkness. I am
giving some prasadam with you so that you can eat after crossing Padmavati. At
noon, you can reach Budhari. Govinda with some men and the cooks should enter
first to the village. Ramacandra and others will go with them up to Budhari.
Then they will be back here for accompanying Sri Iswari to Vrndavana. Now
please accept these prasadam and eat all of your Srinivasa fed all of them with
a broken heart. Even the mahantas became so emotional that they all kept mum.
Then Acarya reported everything to Sri Iswari. Observing the disturbed condition
of Srinivasa, Sri Iswari consoled him and most affectionately gave him her left
over food. In a delighted mind, Acarya asked Santosa to make the boats ready for
the mahantas. Santosa said that he had already done that. Hearing this Acarya
became very glad and went his room to take some rest.
In the morning all of them did their morning duties and observed the morning
ceremony of waving lights. Sri Govinda Kaviraja with some companions and cooks
started first. They crossed Padmavati and at noon reached Budhari. Here the
mahantas in the morning went to take leave of Sri Iswari. Sri Acyutananda told
her in crying, "Most probably, I may not see you again." Sri Gopala and others
told something which could break the heart. Sripati, Srinidhi and others,
Vaninatha and others, Raghunatha Acarya and others, all of them became perturbed
and grief-stricken at the time of taking leave.
Sri Hrdaya Caitanya said, "Please, let me see your feet again." Sri Canda
Haldara, Mitu Haldara, Sri Caitanya and others could not speak anything. Sri
Raghunandana told her, "Please, be kind to us to see you soon." Sri Yadunandana
said, "Please come back. Pippalai and others go back to Khardaha." After bidding
farewell to them, she became extremely sad. Other mahantas gathered in the
courtyard of Prabhu and became ecstatic in emotion. They laid prostrate on the

[p.41]
ground and their bodies became smeared with dust. They all asked for the
well-being of Acarya and others from Prabhu and prayed to him to favor them to
listen to this sankirtana life after life. The priest gave them the clothes used
by Prabhu. By holding the clothes on their hands, they started with broken
hearts.
Sri Hrdaya Caitanya by holding Acarya in his lap, told mildly, "Visit Amvika
time to time and let me see you. Syamananda is yours." Acarya said, "Syamananda
is my life. I do not think of him anything other than this. To Narottama and
Ramacandra, Syamananda and his companions are most precious things." Hrdaya
Caitanya most affectionately dedicated Syamananda to Srinivasa.
When they left Khetari village, an outcry of despair arose in that village. The
people of that village became mad in sorrow. On the bank of Padmavati, Acarya
consoled everybody. After embracing everyone, the mahantas with Ramacandra and
others boarded on the boats which started at once. Acarya and others rolled on
the ground with loud crying. Observing them, the mahantas could not resist
their tears. By the wish of Prabhu, they somehow crossed Padmavati. They took
their baths and ate prasadam and then started for Budhari village.
Acarya and others returned to Khetari. Srinivasa with Sri Thakura Mahasaya and
Syamananda went to the temple of Prabhu. The priest told Acarya Thakura, "Just
now, Sri Iswari took her bath. After the leaving of the mahantas, she had been
sitting alone in a pool of tears. Sri Madhava Acarya and others also took their
baths just now."
Hearing this, Sri Acarya again became restless and hastily went to see Sri
Iswari. Sri Iswari eagerly asked Srinivasa about the going of the mahantas and
he reported everything in brief. On hearing the report, Sri Iswari looked at
the face of Srinivasa whom she found very thin not only for the misery of
separation but also for his fasting since last night. She thought, "Today they
are not at all thinking of their eating. I m afraid of their health. If I do
not take the initiative of feeding them they won't get anything to eat."
Thinking so, she told Acarya sweetly, "You had already taken your bath and it
is now afternoon. But you are still in fasting. It is paining me. So be quiet
and take food in my house." Hearing this, Acarya became so obliged that he
called Narottama and others to that place. Sri Iswari affectionately ordered
Nrsimha Caitanya and other to call everyone and sit in a row on the ground.
Someone arranged the banana leaves and someone filled the glasses with water.
Then Sri Iswari served various kinds of food to them. Being ordered by Sri
Iswari they all ate happily. Sri Iswari out of affection again and again served
a profuse quantity of food to them. They all ate voraciously. After their
eating, the servants cleaned the place.
Sri Acarya and others happily went to gather in the courtyard of Prabhu.
Someone gave them offered betel leaves. When they returned to their own rooms,
they found many presons were waiting for mahaprasadam. So they were also served
prasadam. In this way a huge number of Vaisnavas were fed. Sri Iswari's loving
service cooled their miseries of separation. So a day ended happily. Sri Iswari
went to the temple and became ecstatic in observing the beauty of Prabhu. The
priest gave her the offered garland.
In the evening during the ceremony of waving light, millions of people gathered
in the courtyard. Next started the sankirtan whose divine sound covered the
world. Aged, young, respectable became mad in sankirtana. Even the gods
amalgamated themselves with the people to join in that sankirtana. Some persons
began to roll on the ground while some began to roar like lions. Who will
describe the happiness of Sri Nama sankirtana? In this way they spent the whole
night unconsciously. Due to the wish of Prabhu, they stopped at last. Sri
Jahnava Iswari happily returned to her house. In the morning, after finishing
her daily duties, she took bath in hot water. After doing worship, she began
cooking preparations. Here Sri Acarya and others after taking their baths and

[p.42]
observing the rajbhoga arati of Prabhu came to see Sri Iswari. In the meantime,
Sri Iswari offered food to Prabhu and after his eating she took away the bowls
from the temple. Then she sat among Sri Acarya and others. She asked Acarya
anxiously about Ramacandra and others. At the same time, they returned from
Vudhuri.
They reported, "Everything could be completed perfectly and the mahantas could
eat at Vudhuri very timely. The mahantas did sankirtana after their eating. At
late night they slept a little and in the early morning, everyone became very
much perturbed to bid farewell to us. Most probabaly, we all became
stone-hearted at that time of separation so that we became able to cross
Padmavati to come here very easily." Saying so, they became silent. Sri Iswari
consoled them and fed them. Sri Acarya ate the left over food of Sri Iswari and
then fed the rest of the Vaisnavas who had been waiting for prasadam. Everyone
showed their respect to Sri Acarya who consoled Santosa and others by saying,
"Due to the wish of Sri Iswari, everything is over very succesfully. Now she is
eager to go to Vrndavana and I should not stop her from going. When she will be
back from Vrndavana, you can see her feet again. Now don't show her your
restlessness of minds. Tomorrow morning, she will start." Hearing this, Sri
Santosa Raya slowly went to Iswari and stood there very humbly. Knowing his
mind, Sri Iswari consoled him and Santosa requested her to come back soon to
them. Sri Iswari assured him. Then Sri Santosa Raya most gladly brought all the
things what he would give to Sri Iswari for carrying to Vraja. He gave fine
silky clothes, ornaments, jewelleries for Sri Govinda, Gopinatha, Madanamohana,
Sri Radhavinoda, Sri Radha-ramana and Radha Damodara. Apart from these, he also
gave gold and silver coins to Sri Iswari. Sri Jahnava became very happy to see
that every arrangement had become complete very perfectly.
At the time of waving the light ceremony of the evening, Sri Iswari told
something silently to Prabhu and the garland of Prabhu fell on the ground. The
priest gave that to Sri Iswari who held that on her head. After Sri Nama
sankirtana, Sri Iswari sleep. In the morning, she first went to take her leave
of Prabhu. The priest gave her offered garlands.
Now I shall give the names of companions who went with Sri Iswari. They were
Sri Pandita Krsnadasa, son of Suryadasa, Madhava Acarya, Murari, Caitanya,
Krsnadasa brahmana, Nrsimha Caitanya, Balarama, Mohindhara, Kanai, Nakaridasa,
Gauranga, Sankara, Sri Paramesvara dasa, Dasa Damodara, Raghupati Vaidya,
Upadhyaya Manohara, Jnanadasa, Mukundadasa and others. From Khetari, Sri Iswari
took Sri Govinda, Sri Gopiramana, Bhagavana, Gokula, Nrsimha, Vasudeva and
others. The people of Khetari lost their patience and began to cry.
Sri Narottama, Acarya and other began to follow them for some distance in
crying. The feature of love, Sri Jahnava Iswari, pacified them in various ways
and forbade them to follow her anymore. So she got up in a palanquin and
started her journey. Sri Acarya, Narottama and Syamananda could not check their
tears at the time of their going. In a broken heart, they returned to Khetari.
The people of Khetari in a dying condition began to sing the glory of Sri
Jahnava.
Someone told to another, "She will be back very soon from Vrndavana." Some
said, "She will go to her village in another way. What is the use of coming
here?" Someone said, "This Acarya Mahasaya has won over Sri Iswari by his love
and devotion." All these discussions made them very happy.
Here Sri Acarya, Sri Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda returned to the temple.
Due to the wish of Sri Iswari, they pacified themselves and completed their
baths and worship and then went to observe the waving light ceremony of Prabhu.
They visited all the Vaisnava houses, met them and talked with them. Then they
fed others the prasadam and took their seats in the courtyard of Prabhu. The
cook of Prabhu began to serve food to them. After eating they washed their
mouths and took betel leaves. Acarya along with others became engaged in talking

[p.43]
about Krsna.
In the morning Acarya came to the temple courtyard and told the Vaisnavas who
were about to take their leave, "It is your place. Please come here from time
to time. Now it is evening and too late to start today. Tomorow morning you
should start for your own villages. Now please accept the things which Santosa
Raya had cherished in his mind to give." All of them became glad to hear the
nectar-like words of Acarya. Thus Sri Santosa Raya, according to their
permission, offered fine clothes and coins to them. In the evening, all of them
observed the waving light and then went to their rooms to sleep. Srinivasa with
his companions sat there for sometime in discussing the topic of Krsna and then
went to bed. In the morning, Acarya and others gathered in the courtyard of
Prabhu and observed the morning waving light. The Vaisnavas who would like their
leave then, also gathered and observed the ceremony. The priest gave them
garlands of Prabhu.
Gradually all the Vaisnava guests took their leave of Khetari in singing the
glory of the great festival. The brahmanas, the singers, the dancers and the
instrumentalists also took their leaves in tears. On observing the procession
of men from Khetari, the people of that place began to say, "Who is able to
count the heads"? Someone said, "Everything has been possible for Narottama."
In this way, they began to sing the glory of Narottama. Here Narottama and
Srinivasa took their baths and after doing their worship, ate some sweets.
We don't know on what topic Narottama and Srinivasa were engaged in talking
about but we see them wet with the tears from their eyes. They observed the
beauty of Prabhu and rajbhoga arati of Prabhu. Then they ate prasadam and after
that took betel leaves. Then they took their seats.
Acarya very affectionately told Sri Thakura Mahasaya and Syamananda, "I shall
start tomorow morning with Syamananda and by crossing Padmavati, I shall go to
Vudhuri village. From there I shall go to Yajigrama, I won't stay there long
and shall go to Vana-Visnupura. Again I shall be back to Yajigrama.
And Syamananda will first visit Navadvipa and Amvika and then should go and
settle at Vahadurapura in Dharenda. He should preach devotion in all those
places and should send me a letter with all reports. I shall send a letter with
detailed reports of Yajigrama to him very soon. When Sri Iswari will be back
here, do send me a letter as soon as possible. Sri Iswari will take this course
and from here some persons should accompany her. Then all of us will come to
Khetari again very soon."
Though this news of his going was a shock to Thakura Mahasaya, yet he pacified
himself and went to prepare arrangements for Acarya's going. He sent a letter
quickly to Vudhuri and arranged the boats for crossing Padmavati. The things
which would go with Syamananda were handed over in charge of Rasikananda. The
things which would go with Sri Acarya were handed over in the charge of
Karnapura Kaviraja. Sri Santosa arranged all these things and reported to Sri
Thakura Mahasaya. Hearing this, Acarya became very happy and along with others
went to inspect the store room of Prabhu. He found that the store room was full
of commodities and praised Santosa for this superb deed. They all spent the
evening in enjoying the waving light ceremony. The priest put on the garlands
around their necks for which they began to look very beautiful.
Observing the beauty of Prabhu, Acarya again and again glanced at Narottama
knowing his intention, Sri Thakura Mahasaya started sankirtana. The other
singers and instrumentalists began to arrange their instruments such as khola
and kartalas. Devidasa, Gokula, Gauranga and others began to play khola and
kartalas.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya began to sing a song written by Sri Vasu Ghosa: "Oh Sakhi,
look at the feature of Gaura. See, his beautiful face defeating milions of

[p.44]
moons, his hands defeating the elephants, his eyes defeating the Khanjana
birds. See, his beautiful forehead bedecked with tilaka, his long stretching
hands and flower garland around his neck, his conch like throat and broad
chest, bedecked with sandal and ornaments. See, his thigh and knee defeating
the banana tree and his saffron dress, his white nails defeating millions of
moons." Vasu Ghosa says, "Gora where have you been? Has the providence created
your beauty to charm the maids"?
How can I describe the sweet tune of the song? Mrdanga accompaniment with the
song attracted everone's heart. On listening the sweet sound of the mrdanga and
the melting voice of Narottama made Sri Acarya Thakura mad in love. He stood up
to dance in a beautiful posture which maddened the listeners. He began to shine
in his beautiful golden complexion. How magnetic was his smile in his moon-like
face. How attractive were his lips with kunda-like white teeth. How big were
his lotus eyes stretching up to his ears. How beautiful were his bee-like
eyebrows and parrot beak-like nose. How long were his hands and broad was his
chest. How deep was his navel and beautiful were his legs and feet. Viewers
became mesmerised to see his dancing. The whole of Khetari was present there.
Even many respected persons from distant places were present there. The whole
festival area was lighted up with lamps. Sometimes the people used to sing
loudly the glory of all singing and dancing there.
Even the gods in their carriers appeared on the scene to enjoy the dancing of
Srinivasa. The gods began to say that it was not at all possible for human
being to dance like this. Only the servants of Sri Caitanya could do this. The
gods began to shower flowers on the head of Acarya. While dancing, Srinivasa
forgot his own entity and in emotion he began to embrace Devidasa in a pool of
tears. Who can restrain himself from being moved to listen to the khola recital
of Devidasa and kirtana recital of Sri Gokula? Sri Thakura Mahasaya began to
shout, "Speak, speak" by embracing him. Syamananda, Ramacandra Kaviraja and
others became overwhelmed with emotion and began to weep. Thus the ocean of
happiness overflowed there for the beautiful sankirtana. Due to the wish of
Prabhu, they stopped at late night. After completing kirtana, all of them began
to roll on the ground and smeared the dust of that place. After embracing each
and everyone, they returned to their own houses to take some rest.
In the morning, Sri Acarya dressed up and came to the courtyard of Prabhu.
Syamananda with his companions also came to that place. Narottama with
Ramacandra and Santosa and others in a broken heart came too. Even the people
of Khetari on hearing the leaving of Acarya, came running to the place. The
courtyard of Prabhu became a crowded place. Syamananda bowed before Prabhu. The
priest gave garland and clothes offering of Prabhu to Acarya who distributed
those among others. Though inwardly Acarya was very much moved, yet outwardly
he consoled everybody and started from Khetari. Sri Thakura Mahasaya became
down with misery. Ramacandra pacified him very lovingly. On reaching the bank
of Padmavati, Acarya Thakura hastily boarded on the boat to conceal his emotion.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya told many things to Syamananda who began to float in
a stream of tears. Narottama by taking Syamananda in his lap began to weep
helplessly. Ramacandra pacified them. Syamananda got on the boat which started
at once. They crossed the river and reached Vudhuri.
Here Thakura Mahasaya and others took their baths and returned to the courtyard
of Prabhu. Sudenly the happy memories of Prabhu's dancing with his associates
made Narttama so happy that he began to sing the glory of the courtyard. The
priest informed Sri Thakura Mahasaya that Prabhu's arati was over and now they
could eat prasadam. Sri Thakura Mahasaya with others ate happily and distributed
prasadam among the villagers of Khetari.
On that day many heretics also ate prasadam. Now a change came to their minds
and they began to talk to others in this way, "Oh brothers, how fruitless our
own lives are. Who will rescue us from the judgement of Yama? This Thakura

[p.45]
Narottama can do this." Someone said, "I am scared of going near him." Someone
said, "Let us fall on his feet." In saying this, they in crying fell on the
feet of Narottama.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya who is an ocean of mercy, very sweetly told them, "Don't
cry. You are very fortunate. Sri Krsna Caitanya will favor you and rescue you
from damnation."
On hearing these hopeful words, the poor souls cried out, "Oh my lord, we had
done all types of evil deeds. We are not afraid of doing those deeds. We had
gone elsewhere for dacoity and only had returned last night. Those who did not
go with us, rebuked us to a great extent. They were also dangerous dacoits but
now due to you, they have become Vaisnavas. Oh my lord, be merciful to us."
These pathetic confessions melted the heart of Thakura Mahasaya who favored
them all. He advised them, "Always do wise company and being very humble always
listen and sing kirtana. Always be careful about behaving with Vaisnavas. Don't
do anything which may humiliate them. And always cite Harinama." Saying so he
embraced them all. All of them ran to fall on his feet and he put his feet on
the heads of each and everyone. So devotion most automatically came to reign
over them.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya became very anxious for not getting any news from Acarya.
He decided to send Ramacandra to Acarya but in the meantime a man came with the
letter of Acarya from Yajigrama. Being very glad, Thakura Mahasaya sent a reply
to Acarya and began to sing the glory of Acarya.
All these episodes can purify your mind, so be kind to listen to Narottama
Vilasa by Narahari.

[p.46]
THE NINTH VILASA
Glory to Gaura, Nityananda, Advaita and others. Be favorable to this poor soul.
Glory to the merciful listeners.
While going to Vrndavana from Khetari, Sri Jahnava Iswari had done some
transcendental deeds. Many wicked heretics got favor and mercy from her and
obtained the most valuable gem-like devotion. Those who came in contact with
her, got the favor of Sri Krsna Caitanya and became mad in singing the glory of
Him. The road which Sri Iswari had taken for her travel, the local people used
to follow her in that way. The village which she used to choose for her halt,
the villagers there used to get extreme pleasure. In this way, favoring many
poor souls, she went to Madhupuri (Mathura) quickly via Prayaga. She with all
her followers took bath in Sri Visrama Ghata. She paid respect to a brahmana of
Mathura and stayed there for that night. In the morning, after taking bath,
again started her journey.
The news of her coming to Mathura, spread all over the country. The Gosvamis of
Vrndavana quickly came forward to receive her. Here Sri Iswari became charmed
to see the beauty of the forests of Vrndavana. She could not control her tears.
So she got down from her palanquin and started walking on foot. Sri Paramesvara
dasa told slowly to Iswari, "Sri Gopala Bhatta, Sri Bhugarbha, Lokanatha, Sri
Jiva, Sri Krsna Pandita and others have come here to receive you." Saying so,
he showed her their coming towards her. Seeing them, Sri Jahnava became
overwhelmed with joy. The Gosvamis began to shed tears on seeing Sri Iswari and
fell on her feet. They were introduced to Krsnadasa Sarkhela, Madhavacarya etc.
Sri Paramesvara dasa introduced Sri Govinda and others to them. Sri Govinda
Kaviraja and others bowed to the feet of the Gosvamis. The Gosvamis most
cordially and affectionately embraced them. Sri Jiva Gosvami talked alot with
Sri Iswari and very carefully helped her to get on the palanquin. He took all
of them very quickly to a lonely house. The people took to their heels to meet
Sri Iswari. The priests of Sri Govinda, Gopinatha and Madanamohana came also to
meet her. How can I describe the highest of pleasure which occurred in Vrndavana
after this meeting?
When Sri Iswari with her followers settled themselves in that house, many items
of food came to them. Sri Iswari first fed her men and then took something
herself. Sri Gopala Bhatta and others most gladly returned to their houses. For
observing the rajabhoga arati of Sri Govinda Sri Jiva Gosvami took all of them
to the temple. Sri Jahnava Iswari became charmed to see the beauty of Sri Radha
Govinda after entering into the temple. Sri Madhavacarya and others also became
overwhelmed to observe Sri Govinda. After arati, they took mahaprasadam and
returned to their house for taking rest. Sri Jiva Gosvami returned to his house.
In the afternoon, Sri Jahnava Iswari and others quickly took their baths. Then
they observed Madanamohana, Gopinatha, Sri Radhavinoda, Sri Radharamana and Sri
Radha Damodara. She offered those clothes and ornaments to the deities which she
had brought with her. Then they took prasadam.
She reported to Lokanatha about the great festival at Khetari and the course of
her coming to Vrndavana. The Gosvamis became very glad to hear those incidents.
The Gosvamis also narrated the happenings in Vrndavana. Sri Iswari became very
perturbed to listen to the narrations. After checking her emotion, she told all
of them to listen to the poetry composed by Govinda. His compositions so charmed
the Gosvamis that they conferred the title of Kaviraja on Govinda.
After taking permission from them, Sri Iswari started for Bahulavana and then
for Srikunda. Those who came from Srikunda, now accompanied Sri Iswari to that
place. After visiting Radhakunda and Syamakunda, they went to Sri Manasa Ganga
and Govardhana. Then they went to Vrsabhanupura and from there to Nandisvara.
They also visited Sri Javata village where Balarama had done His rasalila sport.
Again they returned to Vrndavana.

[p.47]
Sri Iswari cooked food for the deities and offered them. Then she distributed
that prasadam among the Gosvamis. In this way, Sri Jahnava stayed a few days
there. Sri Jiva Gosvami read out from his books for Sri Iswari. Now Sri Iswari
with her followers visited the twelve forests of Vraja. Then she began to think
returning to Gauda. The Gosvamis permitted her to go. She took her leave of Sri
Govinda, Gopinatha, Madanamohana, Radha Damodara, Sri Radharamana and Sri Radha
Vinoda. I am unable to describe her pathetic state of mind at the time of
leaving. Madhava Acarya and others pacified her. That day they stayed there.
Gauridasa Pandita had a favorite disciple whose name was Varu Gangadasa, a man
of fine qualities. Once he had come to Vrndavana but he could not live in one
place for a long time and used to travel always here and there. Sri Iswari
favored him and ordered him to go with her to Gauda. Thus by her order, he
prepared himself to go with her. Here Govinda and others went to the houses of
the Gosvamis to take farewell. They bowed to the feet of Sri Gopala Bhatta and
Lokanatha. The Gosvamis blessed them by putting their feet on their heads and
conveyed their blessings to Srinivasa and Narottama. From there they went to
the house of Bhugarbha Gosvami and then to the house of Sri Jiva Gosvami. There
they found Sri Krsnadasa Kaviraja and others. So getting all of them there, they
fell on their feet. The Gosvamis blessed them wholeheartedly.
So Jiva Gosvami affectionately told Govinda, "Report everything to Acarya and
send me a copy of your book Gitamrta. I shall finish this book which I am
writting now very soon. I shall send it with a letter to you there." Saying so,
he gave his book Gopala Virudavali to Govinda. Krsnadasa Kaviraja highly
recommended that book. In this way, they visited all the Gosvami houses and
returned to their house for some rest.
Sri Iswari at late night went to bed and during her sleep Sri Gopinatha appeared
before her in her dream. He gave His own garland to Iswari and in a sweet smile
told her, "What you have thought about my lady-love, send me from Gauda as soon
as possible. She will sit by my left side and this will remain on my right side.
The beauty which will come out of that, you can see later on." Saying so He
entered into the temple.
She woke up and hid the garland in a private place. She went to observe the
morning ceremony of waving light. Then she came back very gladly to her house.
On that morning, in an auspicious moment, she started from there. The Gosvamis
came to bid farewell and acompanied her for some distance. Then being ordered
by Sri Iswari, they stopped following her but burst into tears. Sri Jahnava
Iswari also began to weep. Krsnadasa Pandita, Madhava Acarya, Murari, Caitanya
and others began to weep to. With them wept the people of Vraja. After a long
time, the people of Vraja stopped following them and returned to their houses.
Sri Iswari with others came to Sri Mathura and decided to do a night halt there.
She very carefully fed the Mathura brahmana. From there she started for Gauda.
After a few days, she reached Khetari. Having got the news of her coming,
Narottama out of joy, forgot his own entity. He sent a message to Ramacandra who
with others at once came to Narottama's house. They moved forward with the
people of Khetari to receive Sri Iswari. Who can describe the flood of happiness
when all of them met one another?
Narottama and others fell on the ground to bow to her feet. She became glad too
to see Narottama and others again. Then with a big crowd she entered into
Khetari proper. Sri Iswari was given the same house of the time of festival.
Many Vaisnavas were engaged to serve her. Her companions were also given the
same houses. Varu Gangadasa felt charmed to see the loneliness of the place.
Ramacandra Kaviraja very carefully carried many necessary things to their houses
separately. Sri Thakura Mahasaya earnestly requested Sri Iswari to take her
bath. Thus she took hot bath and then ate some prasadam. Then she quickly cooked
for Prabhu and offered Him. When the mahantas finished their baths, Sri Santosa

[p.48]
offered them new clothes and some prasadam. Then the cooks prepared food,
offered Sri Krsna and then served the prasadam to the mahantas. Then Sri Govinda
Kaviraja and others with the cooks sat for taking food. After that, all of them
took a little nap. Sri Iswari also took a litte nap and then got up quickly to
complete her bath.
Narottama, Ramacandra, Santosa and others gladly came to meet Sri Iswari. Sri
Iswari ordered them to take their seats. Narottama cherished the hope of telling
something to her and she at once realised that. For his satisfaction, Sri Iswari
explained the incidents that had happened at Vrndavana. She also very subtly
explained the order of Sri Gopinatha. When she told them that she would start
soon, Ramacandra with folded hands told her, "We hope that you will stay here
for sometime but your decision has made us very much disappointed."
Iswari said, "I cannot think anything at all you better suggest me what to do."
Sri Thakura Mahasaya said slowly, "It is good to start for Khardaha within
a couple of days for your presence is necessary at the time of building the
image. It is not wise to waste time in relation to this type of job. It will
take some time to reach Khardaha. Tomorrow I shall send a man to Khardaha."
Saying so, in the presence of Sri Jahnava Iswari, he wrote a letter and handed
over to Santosa. He also wrote a letter to Sri Acarya and despatched both the
letters without delay through two persons.
In the evening Sri Iswari went to the courtyard of Prabhu to observe the waving
light ceremony. She remained there for a long time in listening to kirtana.
Then she returned to her house Madhava Acarya and others also returned to their
places. Ramacandra and others remained in the courtyard of Prabhu. After the
offering of food to Prabhu, they distributed the food among the mahantas. After
eating they relaxed on the beds and Sri Santosa and others remained engaged in
massagingg their legs. Ramacandra with a little milk offering of Prabhu, went
to Sri Iswari and requested her to drink that. The brahmana ladies who were
with Sri Iswari, were given food also. While Sri Iswari went to sleep,
Ramacandra returned to the temple of Prabhu. He with Govinda and others took
some prasadam. Thakura Mahasaya also ate something. In an opportune moment,
Thakura Mahasaya instructed Govinda Kaviraja about some duties to be done
towards the Gosvamis on their journey and handed over the book Gopala Virudavali
to Govinda. Govinda gave that to Ramacandra. Then all of them went to sleep.
In the dream of Narottama, Sri Lokanatha Gosvami appeared. Narottama fell on
his feet and soaked his lotus feet with his tears. Lokanatha embraced Narottama
and consoled him with very sweet words. Then he disappeared. Sri Thakura
Mahasaya became very happy and spent the whole night in singing Sri Nama
kirtana.
In the morning all the mahantas took the pleasure of discussing about Sri
Vrndavana with Narottama. They spent four days in this way during which Sri
Iswari took the pleasure of cooking for them. Sri Thakura Mahasaya after
discussing with Ramacandra, fixed up a date of Iswari's going. He sent Sri
Govinda Kaviraja and some others to Vudhuri. Sri Santosa said, "Tomorow they
will start in the morning. So let us prepare the arrangements. He instructed
the priests, "Be careful in serving Prabhu and the Vaisnava's." Warning them in
this way, he reported everything to Sri Iswari. Sri Santosa Raya prepared
everything and handed over the things for Sri Iswari to Paramesvara dasa. In
the morning they all took their leave of Prabhu. The priest gave them Prabhu's
garlands and clothes. They all bowed to Prabhu by lying on the ground. We do
not know what Sri Iswari had prayed to Prabhu silently. She held the garland
and clothes on her head.
Then she started with all from the courtyard. Sri Thakura Mahasaya bade her
farewellby citing a hymn written by himself: "Gauranga Vallabhi Kanta Sri Krsna
Vrajamohana. Radharamana he Radhe Radhakanta Namahastute." Ramacandra with
those who would accompany her, became very perturbed at the time of their

[p.49]
leaving. The people of Khetari village became very perturbed also. They followed
her up to the bank of Padmavati. After consoling everybody Sri Iswari got up on
the boat. Sri Thakura Mahasaya ordered the boatman to cross the Padmavati
quickly. The people of Khetari in a perturbed mind returned to their village.
After crossing the river, they quickly came to Vudhuri. The people of that
village came running to see the mahantas entering into their village. The
mahantas became very satisfied with them and blessed them. Sri Iswari with all
went to stay in a lonely place. Sri Govinda Kaviraja ordered the cooks to start
cooking. Then they offered food to Krsna and kept aside the prasadam after
sometime. Sri Iswari completed her cooking very briefly and offered them with
milk to Krsna. Then she ate very gladly. After taking another bath, she came to
take her seat. The cooks distributed prasadam among the mahantas. Then Sri
Thakura Mahasaya with the rest of all ate very gladly.
On that day, Sri Iswari became very happy and negotiated the marriage of Varu
Gangadasa who was a very apathetic type of man and had no intention to marry.
But due to the order of Sri Iswari, he had to marry. Syama Raya, which was
a beautiful image in looking, appeared in the dream of Sri Iswari and told her,
"Now hand me over to Varu Gangadasa." Being ordered in her dream, Sri Iswari
became very happy and did that what he had said. She arranged the food offering
to Syama Raya and a great festival took place on the next day. We do not know
what she had instructed Varu Gangadasa but we can see that since that day, he
was engaged in the service of Syama Raya and began to settle at Vudhuri.
Sri Iswari with all came to Kantakanagara. Sri Yadunandana and others came
forward to receive them and brought them in the temple of Prabhu at the time of
Prabhu's just going to bed. All of them became very happy to see Gauracandra
and then went to an arranged house. Sri Thakura Mahasaya and other also were
given beautiful but solitary houses. They went to take bath in the Ganges.
Sri Yadunandana sent a message to Yajigrama and Sri Acarya Thakura with his men
came quickly to that place. Then all of them ate prasadam. They became very
glad to see Acarya. Srinivasa bowed to the feet of all the mahantas who
affectionately embraced him. They asked Acarya about his well being. The persons
who came with Srinivasa, bowed to the feet of the mahantas. The cooks prepared
the food and offered Krsna. After that they kept aside the prasada. Sri Iswari
cooked quickly in brief and offered to Krsna. Then she ate something and after
taking another bath, she requested the mahantas to eat. The mahantas along with
Srinivasa and others ate most gladly. Then Srinivasa went to Sri Iswari and they
remained engaged in talking to each other. Then Srinivasa went to the house of
Narottama. Sri Govinda Kaviraja reported everything to Srinivasa what the
Gosvamis had instructed him. Ramacandra Kaviraja gave the book Gopala Virudavali
to Acarya who held it on his head.
He with all the mahantas observed the ceremony of waving light before Prabhu.
They they started sankirtana. Sri Jahnava became overwhelmed to see the beauty
of Prabhu. After a long time, she returned to her house. Sri Gauranga also was
led to the bed to sleep. Srinivasa and the mahantas also went to their places
to sleep.
At the end of the night Sri Gopala Bhatta appeared in the dream of Srinivasa
who at once fell on his feet and washed the lotus feet of his religious master
by his tears. Sri Bhatta Gosvami embraced him and told Srinivasa sweetly, "I am
always with you. You are my principal disciple in birth after birth." Saying so
he put his feet on the head of Srinivasa and then disappeared. Srinivasa in the
memory of Sri Gopala Bhatta, got up on his bed and sang the glory of Sri Krsna
Caitanya.
In the morning he finished his morning duties and bathing in the Ganges. He
visited the temple of Sri Gauranga and the place of Sri Bharati. At the time of
departing all of them became perturbed with misery. Srinivasa consoled Sri

[p.50]
Yadunandana and others. Then with Sri Iswari Srinivasa came to Yajigrama. Acarya
Thakura sent a message to Khanda which made the people of that place mad in joy.
Sri Raghunandana came to Yajigrama and observed the feet of Sri Jahnava. He
stayed at Yajigrama for a long time during which he became restless in listening
to the incidents of Vraja. Again with Srinivasa, he went to meet Sri Iswari and
told her mildly, "I have heard everything from Srinivasa. There should be no
delay to go to Khardaha. Tomorrow, do come to Sri Khanda. I have to go now."
Saying so, after bowing to her feet, Sri Raghunandana returned to Khanda
happily. He collected all necessary things for her service and cleaned the house
for her. The people of Khanda began to wait eagerly for Sri Iswari.
There at Yajigrama, Sri Iswari with others quickly finished their eating. Acarya
read out from the devotional books for some time and they started sankirtana.
In the morning, Sri Iswari with others went to Sri Khanda. Quickly they moved to
the courtyard of Prabhu and became glad to observe the beauty of Prabhu.
They became overwhelmed with emotion to see the places where Nityananda Prabhu
had danced, where He had drank honey in a trance of love, where Nitai had
observed the dance of Narahari. After enjoying the pleasure of those places,
they returned to their houses. On that day they quickly finished their cooking
and after offering food to Prabhu, they finished their eating quickly.
Knowing the mind of Sri Iswari, Sri Raghunandana started beautiful kirtana and
in the flood of sankirtana, everyone began to swim happily. They began to roll
on the ground forgetting their own entities. Playing of musical instruments was
as beautiful as dancing. They began to sing the glory of singing, dancing and
playing of instruments in that way. In a trance of emotion, they spent the whole
night in singing kirtana. Due to the wish of Prabhu they stopped at last and
went to their houses to take rest.
In the morning they did their morning duties. Sri Iswari hastily finished her
bath, cooked for Prabhu and then fed all of them by her own hand. Who knows how
they had enjoyed the eating on that day? Sri Raghunandana became overwhelmed
with emotion observing the affection of Sri Iswari towards them. The people of
Sri Khanda were greatly moved by the high qualities of the associates of Sri
Iswari. Sri Iswari again took her bath and sat among Srinivasa and others. She
told him, "From here, we should move to Khetari. Tomorrow morning, we should
start for Khardaha. I shall send a messege from there soon." Saying in this
way, she came to the courtyard of Prabhu and observed the evening waving light.
Then all of them started Sri Nama kirtana.
When all of them went to their houses Sri Raghunandana and his men met Sri
Iswari and told her softly, "We heard that tomorow morning you will start from
here. We don't dare to forbid you to go now. As you are independent one, we are
seared to request you that we will be obliged if you please visit our place
from time to time. There is no one so shameless creature like me. My worthless
life is still alive though it is always burning in the fire of separation."
Hearing these humble utterances of Sri Raghunandana, Sri Iswari could not check
her tears. After a long time Sri Iswari and Raghunandana pacified themselves.
Raghunandana distributed prasadam to everybody though they were not at all
hungry. He handed over the things what were for Sri Iswari to Sri Madhava
Acarya. As it was already late for going to bed, they hastily went to their
houses.
In the morning, apathetic scene occurred there when all of them began to say
goodbye to one another. Sri Iswari took the same course to go to Khardaha.
Here Sri Thakura Raghunandana at Sri Khanda used to be very glad to get the
company of Acarya and his associates. Sri Acarya stayed that day at Sri Khanda.
In the morning he went back to Yajigrama. After spending 2-3 days at Yajigrama,
Acarya went to Nadia with two persons. His Navadvipa tour had been discussed in

[p.51]
Bhakti-ratnakara.
From there, he came back to Yajigrama and spent that day in sankirtana. On the
next day, he started in the morning and within 4-5 days came to Vudhuri. He
ordered Sri Govinda Kaviraja and others to stay at Vudhuri and he himself came
to Khetari on the next day. The people of Khetari came to meet him. He with
Thakura Mahasaya talked to them very sweetly. All of them came to the courtyard
of Gauranga and observed Him. In the meantime, a letter from Khardaha arrived.
Being relieved to know about the well-being of Khardaha, he sent a reply with
the news of well being of Khetari to Khardaha. After going back to their house,
Acarya and Thakura Mahasaya remained engaged in discussing about Krsna. We do
not know what Acarya, Thakura Mahasaya and Ramacandra had discussed alone. Sri
Acarya stayed there for 15 days and then went to Kancanagaria via Vudhuri. There
they stayed for 5 days and then went to Yajigrama.
At Yajigrama, Sri Acarya remained engaged in teaching his disciples all the
devotional scriptures. Who will dare to interfere in his discussions? The
debate-loving persons used to flee from that place. Students from distant places
used to come to him to study. Acarya used to visit many places as a professor of
devotional scriptures due to the favor of Sri Caitanya. Sinners and heretics due
to the favor of Acarya began to sing the glory of Sri Krsna Caitanya.
Sri Thakura Narottama who was an ocean of qualities and a non-detachable?
feature of Sri Acarya, began to spend his days happily with Ramacandra who was
more favorite to him than his own life. Sri Thakura Mahasaya and Ramacandra
remained engaged in teaching Srimad Bhagavata and the books of the Gosvamis to
their students. On listening to the analysis of devotional scriptures by
Narottama, the believers in karma and jnana began to criticise Thakura Mahasaya
by saying, "Being a Vaisnava, he is criticising karma and jnana." But even the
brahmanas of distant places used to come to Khetari to study Gosvami books along
with the Vaisnavas and then began to teach others.
One day, Narottama with Ramacandra had been discussing the topic of Krsna. In
the meantime, a distinguished brahmana came to Narottama and told him in crying,
"Oh being proud, I told so many things against you to many students but on that
particular day I had criticised you, I became a prey to the disease of leprosy.
I took many medicines and performed many rituals, but alas, apart from cure,
the disease began to aggravate day by day. I thought of commiting suicide by
jumping into the Ganges. In my dream, Devi Bhagavati apeared and angrily told
me, "You will face a severe misfortune. Being proud, you have insulted Narottama
by calling him a sudra. You are still a fool after studying so many scriptures.
He who has taken Narottama as an ordinary man, has no chance of averting
misfortune in any life. If he forgives you, then you will get rid of
misfortune." Saying so, she disappeared. In the morning, I have come straight
to you. First of all, I became afraid of facing you but a brahmana in my way
told me that you are ever merciful. I looked at you from a distance but your
merciful feature at once has cooled my eyes as if I have got back my life. Oh
lord, be merciful to me. I am taking refuge to your feet." Saying so, the
brahmana began to cry loudly. He fell on the ground to touch the feet of
Narottama.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya said, "You have done nothing to humiliate me." The brahmana
said, "Do put your feet on my head, then a sinner's mind will be pacified."
Narottama thinking of Sri Krsna Caitanya, embraced the brahmana. The brahmana
being very glad took the dust of Narottama's feet and began to dance by raising
his hands. After a long time, he became quiet but by that time his disease had
gone and he became purified at long last. The feeling of love and devotion arose
in the mind of the brahmana which led him to think, "This cure seems to me very
dangerous. I hope I could get the disease again for this cure may create pride
in my mind." So this thought made him a Vaisnava and his followers became
Vaisnavas too.

[p.52]
These news spread all over the village which made all the brahmanas scared.
They began to warn one another in this way, "Be careful in your behaviour about
Narottama. Don't call Narottama a low caste person." Someone said, "Being proud
of our brahmanism, we have failed to acknowledge a jewel like Narottama."
Someone said, "There is no question of being a brahmana or a high caste person.
Without his mercy, it is not possible to identify him." Someone said, "Narottama
is himself an abode of mercy. He by his own quality can save the sinners."
Someone said, "So many qualities do not belong to an ordinary man. He is a man
only in appearance. He is an incarnation to save the beings from damnation."
The brahmana warned his followers by singing the glory of Narottama. Narottama's
qualities were above any discussion. He used to visit Yajigrama from time to
time to meet Acarya.
I have elaborately discussed the meeting of Narottama and Acarya with Vira
Hamvira in Bhakti-ratnakara. So be patient in listening to Narottama Vilasa by
Narahari.

[p.53]
THE TENTH VILASA
Glory to Gaura, Nityananda, Advaita and their associates. Be kind to this poor
soul. Glory to the merciful listeners.
Now listen, Sri Rama and Sri Raghunandana, two disciples of Acarya, came back
from Vrndavana. They reported gladly to Thakura Mahasaya about the well-being
of Vraja. They told excitedly, "How can we describe the beauty of Radha
Thakurani sent by Sri Jahnava Iswari? She had created a magnificent glory by
sitting in the left side of Gopinatha who Himself had ordered the Gosvamis to
do that. They had held a great festival on this occassion that we had seen by
our own eyes. The Vaisnavas of Vraja had become mad in joy." Hearing this
incident, all of them became very glad and Ramacandra requested those two to
take their baths quickly.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya with Ramacandra went gladly to take their bath in
Padmavati. On their way, they saw two brahmana boys were coming wtih many cubs
of goats, sheeps and buffaloes. Looking at them, Sri Mahasaya told Ramacandra
that these two boys had fine devotional qualities for worshipping Krsna.
Ramacandra began to discuss different scriptures in the presence of those two
boys. The boys on hearing the discussion from some distance began to tell to
each other, "Most probably these two Vaisnavas are Sri Thakura Mahasaya and
Kaviraja. We have already heard about their glory. Today is an auspicious day
that we can meet them now." Saying so, they put aside the cubs and came near to
Ramacandra and Thakura Mahasaya with a heart swinging like a pendulum. Thakura
Mahasaya sweetly asked them, "Who are you? Whose son s you are?" One boy told,
"I am Harirama and he is my younger brother, Ramakrsna. Sivai Acarya is our
father. He used to spend a lot of money on the occassion of Bhavani worship.
Balarama Kaviraja is a good physician. Being ordered by our father, we came here
to buy these cubs. My father believes that sacrifice of these cubs before the
goddess will grant him the happiness of heaven." After saying so, he called on
his men and ordered them to cross Padmavati leaving those cubs here. Being
ordered by Harirama Acarya, they crossed the river without the cubs and these
two brahmana boys. Harirama told Thakura Mahasaya, "True, we came here to buy
the cubs, but now our visions have become cleaned by your teachings. Now be
favorable to us and accept us and give once again the proof of your glory."
Saying so the two brothers fell on the ground to touch his feet.
Observing the humble disposition of these two brothers, both Thakura Mahasaya
and Ramacandra became very much perturbed and embraced them. After taking bath,
they took those boys to the temple of Prabhu most happily. That day was an
auspicious day and Sri Kaviraja initiated Harirama. Thakura Mahasaya intitiated
Ramakrsna Acarya. Harirama and Ramakrsna were very fortunate because at once
they could get the feeling of the unattachable identity of Ramacandra and
Narottama. They fell prostrate on the feet of their religious masters who
empowered their disciples to a great extent. They dedicated their disciples to
the feet of Radha-Krsna and Caitanya. They helped their disciples to know Sri
Bhakti Sidhantas thoroughly. Harirama and Ramakrsna became mad in the juices of
love and devotion.
On the eleventh day i.e. the day after Vijaya Dasami (the tenth day of the
worship of goddess Bhavani), they asked for their farewell from their religious
masters and came back to Goyasa village from Khetari. They first of all got
Balarama Kaviraja and spent that night in his house. They told everything to
Balarama who is turn reported everything about their father. In the morning
they became face to face with their father. On seeing his sons, Sivai became
fire with anger and shouted at them by saying, "Oh fools, which one among
the scriptures has said that the Vaisnavas are superior to brahamanas? By
offending Bhagavati, you have spoilt your lives. What type of Vaisnava he is
that he made to accept defeat and humiliation before the society of scholars?
I know I must be successful due the favor of Durga towards me. Thus further,

[p.54]
he won't dare to do this." Harirama became furious and cried out again and
again, "Let the Panditas come here and let me see their powers. They have to
defeat me first otherwise all their shoutings will be proven fake." On hearing
the utterances of his son, Sivai Acarya became impatient in anger and forced
his son to appear before the Pandita Society. Harirama, proud like a lion,
refuted all the explanations of the Panditas and established the superiority of
devotion. He proved that the Vedas have said that the Vaisnavas are worshipped
by all. The Panditas being defeated from all respects, began to stare at
Harirama. Someone said, "How can he know all the scriptures?" Another one
replied, "From the favor of Vaisnavas, do you know the glory of Ramacandra
and Narottama? These two brothers had obtained favor from those great Vaisnavas.
No one can defeat them." The Panditas became ashamed and went back to their
house after saying, "The Vaisnavas have power, no doubt." Out of blind anger,
Sivai called forth Murari who was a world conquering scholar of Mithila. He was
so proud of his knowledge that he used to look upon the other scholars like
grass under his feet. He came with many students and supporters. Balarama
Kaviraja very easily defeated him in the debate. Being defeated, he said, "It
is impossible for me to grasp the limit of glory of the Vaisnavas." Saying so,
he distributed all his belongings among others and took self-banishment by not
going back to his own country. He accepted the life of a beggar. Sivai being
ashamed, reached to the dying condition. He became very sorry for insulting the
Vaisnavas. He was rightly served by goddess Bhagavati.
The news of the people being converted into Vaisnavism spread all over the
countries. The Vaisnavas became very glad for this. Harirama and Ramakrsna
Acarya gladly engaged themselves in nama-sankirtana. They became most apathetic
towards material life after getting the valuable wealth like devotion. They
began to stay with Balarama Kaviraja being always engaged in singing the glory
of Sri Krsna Caitanya. One day, on some personal purpose, the two brothers came
to Gamvila village on the bank of Suradhuni (Ganga). That place had many
scholars among whom Ganganarayana Cakravarti was the foremost one. He was a man
of devotional disposition and had conquered the desire for material pleasure.
He was a good teacher. Secretly he had been watching Harirama and Ramakrsna and
began to think after observing their transcendental brightness, "They were not
like this before, but now what a change has come in them. Kaviraja and Sri
Thakura Mahasaya had favored them for which they have become great Vaisnavas
and great scholars in all scriptures. Many scholars had accepted defeat from
them. Being ashamed the world-conqueror scholar became a beggar. These two
brothers are very fortunate. He who had criticised Thakura Mahasaya, had been
rightly served by Bhagavati. I, the worst brahmana, being proud of my knowledge
had neglected him. The only way of my survival is to get favor from him. It is
known that he is very merciful."
Thinking in this way, Ganganarayana began to weep and to lament in this way,
"There is no religion above Vaisnavism and worthless person like me get no
interest in that religion. Fie, fie to my life. Without worshipping Krsna, I
had spent the whole life on trifle things. Oh, lord Narottama, help me to
obtain love and devotion. I am taking refuge to your lotus feet."
In lamentation he spent most of the night. At late night, he fell asleep and
dreamt of Thakura Mahasaya in shinning glory and full of mercy. He was telling
him smilingly, "You are my servant, don't lament. All your desires will be
fulfilled. Tomorrow, at the time of your bath in the Ganges, you will see me. I
have come here from Khetari. That time I shall talk to you." As he disappeared,
Ganganarayana became very sad.
In the morning, after quickly finishing his daily duties, he came on the bank
of Ganga and sat there in silent prayer. Harirama and Ramakrsna came to that
place. Cakravarty greeted them very humbly and told them, "Please do stay here
for a few days with me. If I am fortunate enough to get Prabhu here, please
tell him about me." Most fortunately, Mahasaya with some disciples came to the
bank of the Ganges. Harirama and Ganganarayana told, "Look, prabhu by chance

[p.55]
has come to take bath in the Ganges." Ganganarayana became highly satisfied
because he found Thakura Mahasaya just the same, he had seen in his dream.
Cakravarty asked Harirama about the identities of the Vaisnavas coming with
Narottama. Harirama helped Ganganarayana to get the identities of them and
moved forward to Narottama to give the identity of Ganganarayana. With a smile,
Thakura Mahasaya said, "Bring Ganganarayana to me soon."
Ganganarayana came with Harirama and fell on the feet of Narottama who in
a trance of love embraced Ganganarayana. In a sweet voice, he asked
Ganganarayana, "Well, gentleman, won't the other brahmanas mind for this type
of your behaviour? Ganganarayana said, 'Oh my lord, if your favor goes to the
poor soul, he never cares for those devotionless brahmanas." Saying so he
worhipped the feet of Ramacandra. Ganganarayana was introduced to everybody.
The people out of astonishment whispered to one another, "We found him in
Gamvila many times but what a surprise, he is now a completely changed person."
Someone said, "He who was always proud of his knowledge, now how he has became
so humble? Someone said, "How this type of devotion arose in him? It was totally
imposible for him." Someone said, "Oh brothers, I think that everything has
become posible due to the presence of this Mahasaya." Then everyone began to
praise the fortune of Ganganarayana who being a staunch brahmana, had become
a devout Vaisnava.
Anticipating that Ganganarayana was trying to tell something to him, Thakura
Mahasaya told him, "Don't think anything else. After taking bath, I shall go to
Vudhuri and tomorrow I shall go back to Khetari for I have some important
business to do in the temple of Gauranga. You should stay here today with
Harirama and Ramakrsna and tomorrow you all should go to Vudhuri. There you can
meet Karnapura and others. On the next morning you all should go to Khetari
quickly." Saying so, after a quick bath, Mahasaya went to Vudhuri with others.
Ganganarayana after his bath went to home with Harirama and Ramakrsna and stayed
at Gamvila for that day. In the early morning they went to Vudhuri gladly and
stayed in the house of Sri Govinda Kaviraja. Divyasimha, son of Govinda became
astonished to observe the devotional efforts Ganganarayana. There, Karnapura
Kaviraja and others were also present. In the morning they hastily came to
Khetari and observed the image of Sri Gauranga. Ganganarayana prayed before
Prabhu for the fulfilment of his desire. That day they spent in the pleasure of
sankirtana.
On the next morning, after finishing bath and daily duties, Thakura Mahasaya
thought that today was the most auspicious day to initiate Ganganarayana. So
did he and dedicated Ganganarayana to the lotus feet of Sri Krsna Caitanya.
Narottama, who was an incarnation of devotion, empowered Ganganarayana with his
own power. Being overwhelmed with joy, Ganganarayana could not check his tears
and lay prostrate on the lotus feet of Narottama who took him to his bosom.
Narottama dedicated Ganganarayana to Ramacandra. Ganganarayana worshipped the
feet of Ramacandra, Govinda Kaviraja and others. All the Vaisnavas there became
very happy. Ganganarayana, the genius of all scriptures, began to study the
Gosvami books. He began to swim continuously in the stream of happiness derived
from sankirtana. In this way, Ganganarayana achieved some extra high qualities
of love and devotion.
Jagannatha Acarya who was a devout worshipper of Bhagavati, was ordered by her
to take refuge to the lotus feet of Narottama. She told him, "Without
worshipping Krsna, life is a futile one. Go and touch the feet of Narottama
who will give you salvation." Being ordered by her, he in the next morning came
to Khetari and fell on the feet of Thakura Mahasaya. With tears he told Thakura
Mahasaya, "Being ordered by Bhagavati, I have come to you. Now I am at your
feet. Oh lord, please initiate me and save me from damnation." Hearing this
humble confession, Thakura Narottama initiated that brahmana. In this way,
Narottama got many disciples. For this incident, some became happy while some
became angry.

[p.56]
There was a king in a distant place, named Narasimha who was a great patron of
scholar brahmanas. One of those brahmanas angrily complained to the king,
"There is no one to think about religion which is in stake now. Narottama dasa,
son of Krsnananda Datta, had become a Vaisnava and now he is initiating the
brahmanas. I don't know what type of a magician he is in doing all these
miracles. If you say that he is a scholar, then my opinion is this is his false
pride before the ignorants. Will he dare to face us? Let us go to his place and
let see the fun. I know he must make haste to flee from there. If you can
accomplish this, you will be praised by all the countries for keeping the
prestige and superiority of the brahmanas. The king is the saviour and the only
judge due to the order of God. Otherwise the brahmana class will be perished."
On hearing this, the king made arrangements to go to Khetari with others among
whom there was Rupanarayana also. The professors with many books started
proudly. The king with his men halted at Kumarapura village near Khetari. Here,
on getting the news of the king's coming, Mahasaya told Ramacandra slowly, "We
have to face the professors and I know a great debate will occur." Ramacandra
smiled and said, "They can be defeated very easily and will come to fall on
your feet." Thus Ramacandra and Ganganarayana came to Kumarapura and took the
guises of two shopkeepers. One of them became the seller of betel leaf in shop
to buy betel leaf. When he asked the price for betel leaf, the seller replied
in sanskrit. The student accepted his defeat. The seller said, "You are a fool,
you know nothing. If you want to keep your prestige, go and bring your
teacher."
The student being ashamed informed everything to his professor and said, "That
young sellers of Khetari, the place of Narottama, are great scholars. If you
want to defeat Narottama, first defeat these young sellers. Otherwise stop
going to Khetari." Hearing this the Pandits became furious and ordered the
student to guide them to that place. They began debate on different scriptures.
Gradually Narasimha, Rupanarayana and many people came to that place to witness
the battle of scriptures. The seller men began to refute one by one all the
explanations given by the Pandita in a very polite way. Thus very easily the
Panditas were defeated by the sellers. Someone said, "When the Panditas had
come here they were just like lions. But now after defeat they have become
dogs." Then the people began to sing the glory of Thakura Mahasaya.
These hearsays made the king nervous. He asked Rupanarayana very slowly, "What
is the way out now"? Rupanarayana said, "Vaisnavism is superior to all
religions. Humiliating the Vaisnavas leads to the path of hell. Let us go and
take refuge to his feet. Otherwise there is no way out from damnation."
Narasimha said, "I am also thinking so. Let us go quickly." Rupanarayana said,
"Stay here today. Tomorrow start with your men." This news spread all over that
tomorrow the king with his men would go to Khetari. The condition of the
professors was undoubtedly most miserable. They could not face the king due to
shame. They confined themselves in a lonely place. They used to tell one
another about the forthcoming situation they had to face tomorrow.
Here after defeating the professors, the two shopkeepers started for Khetari.
Ramacandra distributed the betel leaves among the poor and Ganganarayana also
distributed his earthen materials among the poor villagers. Being satisfied,
they returned to Khetari and reported everything to Thakura Mahasaya. Here King
Narasimha began to think silently whether a wicked person like him would get
the mercy of Thakura Mahasaya. In extreme lamentation, he told Rupanarayana,
"My life will be totally futile unless I get his mercy." Certain invisible
one throw the words, "He will forgive by his own forgiveful nature." The king
became very much perturbed to hear this and began to wait for the morning in
a swinging heart.
How pity was the condition of the professors. The most proud professor among
them fell asleep at late night and saw in his dream goddess Bhagavati with

[p.57]
a sword in her hand. She told in an angry voice, "Oh you rogue, how futile is
your whole life study. You will go to hell as you have criticised the Vaisnavas.
I shall be satisfied if I sever you head. Oh wicked soul, I don't know how to
give you a lesson. Only Narottama can save you from damnation."
Then with blood-shot eyes, the goddess vanished. Waking up from sleep, the
professor began to tremble in fear. He awakened others with a shout and told
others, "Luckily I am saved. Bhagavati came to kill me as I had underestimated
Narottama. Now only he can save me from the sufferings of the hell." In the
morning, he went to report everything to the king. The king told, "I had forbade
you before to criticise Narottama as an ordinary man. Is it posible for a human
being to perform all these transcendental deeds? Sri Thakura Mahasaya is
respected person to us all." Saying so, he consoled the pandita.
After taking their baths, the king with all the professors started for Khetari
on foot. Reaching Khetari, they hastily went to the courtyard of Gauranga.
Being very humble, the king with others lay prostrate on the ground to bow
to Sri Gauranga. Ramacandra, the most wise person, with Govinda and others,
took great care of them. All of them became very eager to meet Sri Thakura
Mahasaya who had been sitting in a lonely place. After a while, Sri Thakura
Mahasaya came to that place and everyone had been observing his beauty. King
Narasimha and Rupanarayana advanced forward first towards Narottama and said
humbly, "Oh lord, how can we introduce ourselves? We are full materialists and
wicked persons. We are dedicating ourselves to you but we are afraid of telling
anything to you. Please kindly initiate us and fulfil our desires." Saying so,
they fell on his feet with tears in their eyes. Observing their perturbed
condition, Thakura Mahasaya very affectionately consoled them and embraced them.
Narasimha and Rupanarayana fell on the ground to touch his feet and at once all
their agonies were vanished and they got extreme peace in their minds.
The king brought that illustrious professor to Narotama and said, "He is the
head of the professors. His pride has gone and now forgive and favor him." That
brahmana stood before Mahasaya and sorrowfully reported about the anger of the
goddess. He fell on the ground in crying and sought the refuge of Narottama.
Sri Thakura Mahasaya, the image of mercy, favored him by embracing him. Then
Ramacandra pacified him by lifting him from the ground. Then all of them became
devotees of Krsna Caitanya.
Thakura Mahasaya with all of them came to the courtyard of Prabhu and observed
the waving light ceremony of Prabhu. Sri Santosa Raya most heartily took them
to a house and brought many things for their eating. He most humbly requested
them to cook their food but Narasimha and others begged prasadam from Santosa
Raya who most gladly granted this proposal. So Narasimha, Rupanarayana and
others went to that place where Sri Thakura Mahasaya with his followers had
been sitting. How can I describe the divine pleasure they got in eating
prasadam? Then they spent the whole day in extreme pleasure.
On the next day, in an auspicious moment all of them took initiation from Sri
Thakura Narottama who dedicated them to the feet of Prabhu. Rupanarayana and
others stayed there for a few days during which they began to study the Gosvami
books. In due course of time all of them became possessors of love and devotion
and extremely interested in doing sankirtana. They used to enjoy the songs
written by Sri Govinda Kaviraja. They used to listen to Srimad Bhagavata from
Ganganarayana Cakravarty. In this way, they forgot the difference between day
and night. He who once came to Khetari forgot to go elsewhere leaving this type
of divine pleasure. King Narasimha and Rupanarayana hurriedly went to their
country to bring the queen Rupamala who was a devoted wife and a lady of
beautiful disposition. Thakura Mahasaya became very happy to observe her
beautiful nature and gave her initiation. Rupamala became so happy that she
sweared to take one lakh of Harinama in a day. Everyone began to sing the glory
of Thakura Mahasaya.

[p.58]
Haricandra Raya was a dacoit. He heard about the qualitites of Thakura Mahasaya
and came to take refuge to his feet. Thakura Mahasaya saved him from damnation
by giving him initiation. After initiation, he was renamed as Haridasa and
became the possessor of precious gem-like devotion. He gave up? his Zamindari
of Jalapantha. Everyone became astonished to see the change in a dacoit. The
people began to whisper, "Sri Thakura Mahasaya is a man of transcendental
qualitites by which he subdued a dacoit very easily. But Canda Raya is the most
notorious of all dacoits. If he can overcome Canda Raya, the whole country
can heave a sigh of relief." Someone said, "Don't worry, Canda Raya will soon
be favored and with all his men will be great Vaisnavas. Due to that favor, he
must give up his dacoity."
In the meantime, one brahmana came to them to inform about the rescue of Canda
Raya by Thakura Mahasaya. Canda Raya was a terror before but now his only
appearance could give pleasure to the eyes. The brahmana further said, "I have
seen in my own eyes that Canda Raya and his men are dancing in sankirtana on
the courtyard of Prabhu." Hearing this miraculous incident, the people in
a crowd went to see Canda Raya whom they found lying on the dust of the ground
and his whole body was trembling with emotion. Everyone got relief for averting
the tyranny of Canda Raya.
In the meantime, some unkown persons with arms and weapons came to that place
and asked the people how Canda Raya had become a Vaisnava. The people explained
the whole event in nutshell. Canda Raya with his followers were devotees of
goddess Bhagavati. Canda Raya was a powerful Zamindar and the head of the
dacoits. Goddess Bhagavati became so angry upon him that she punished him with
the help of a brahmana ghost. When again she found that Canda's life was at
stake, she ordered him to take refuge to the feet of Narottama. Thakura Mahasaya
favored him and rescued him from damnation. Canda Raya became a most humble
Vaisnava.
Taking advantage of his weakness, the Yavana king tried to torture him. But
Canda Raya did not bother about his pains and remained loyal to the feet of
Narottama. The Yavana king brought a mad elephant to kill Canda Raya but the
elephant fled away instead of moving forward towards Canda Raya. Being highly
disturbed the king ordered to imprison Canda Raya. Instead of being sad, Canda
Raya thought gladly that he had been rightly served for his misdeeds. Someone
suggested him to cite hymns praising the goddess but Canda Raya refused to cite
any other hymns that hymns of Lord Krsna. Observing his sincerity, Prabhu became
so glad that due to him the Yavana king became so afraid that he released Raya
after begging to him. He came to Khetari to meet Thakura Mahasaya.
Hearing all these incidents, the unknown persons, throwing out their weapons,
laid prostrate on the ground before Thakura Mahasaya. Thakura Mahasaya asked
them sweetly about their particulars. They replied in tears, "We are dacoits of
Bengal and the most disgracing thing is that we are brahmanas and Canda Raya is
our leader. We used to do dacoity on the river. This time we had come here to
consult with Raya but we heard about the episode of Canda Raya from the people.
Now we have changed our minds. Observing your lotus feet from distance, a sudden
change came to our mind. We are wicked and robbers. Please save us from
damnation." Now they began to cry miserably. In the meantime Canda Raya came to
that place and all of them became very happy to see him. Canda Raya very humbly
greeted them all. After a few days, Thakura Mahasaya initiated them all.
If anyone listens to these episodes, can get rid of damnation. So be attentive
to Narottama Vilasa by Narahari.

[p.59]
THE ELEVENTH VILASA
Glory to Gaura, Nityananda, Advaita and their associates favor the poor soul.
Glory to the merciful listeners.
Now listen to me. Kaviraja Thakura and Thakura Mahasaya wrote two separate
letters in which they enclosed the songs written by Sri Govinda to Vrndavana
very carefully. In reply from Vrndavana, they got the news of the well-being of
that place. Thus gladly they conveyed this news to Yajigrama. At Yajigrama,
Acarya with his students and followers used to spend the days in discussing
about devotional scriptures. On knowing the efforts of Sri Narottama by which
he had favored and saved many heretics and wicked dacoits, pleased Acarya to
a great extent. He at once decided to go to Khetari.
In the meantime, someone informed that Virabhadra had come to their place.
Being delighted, Acarya Thakura advanced forward to meet Viracandra who on
seeing Acarya coming towards him, got down from his palanquin quickly. Acarya
and his followers fell on the ground to show their respect to Virabhadra who at
once embraced Acarya and asked about his well being. Viracandra started walking
slowly with Acarya by holding the hand of Acarya.
Acarya very humbly asked Viracandra Prabhu, "I thought one day at Khardaha that
I will go to Khetari via Yajigrama. With my followers I had already visited the
places of Nadia. Then I went to Sri Khanda and from there quickly I have come
here." Saying so, he entered into a house and took his seat. The visit of Prabhu
so delighted Acarya that it seemed to him as if the actual owner had come to his
own place. Draupadi Iswari and Sri Gauranga-priya, wives of Acarya, bowed to
the feet of Viracandra Prabhu. They washed the feet of Prabhu with cold water.
The eldest son of Acarya, who had been named by Sri Jiva Gosvami as Vrndavana,
was a boy of very beautiful intellect. Vrndavana with his two brothers,
Radhakrsna and Sri Gitagovinda fell on the feet of Prabhu who blessed them very
affectionately. He put his feet on the heads of the three respectively. The
three daughters of Acarya, Hemalata, Krsnapriya and Sri Kancanalata were very
devotional minded. They also bowed to the feet of Prabhu Viracandra who blessed
them too. Prabhu asked about their well being very sweetly and the three girls
spontaneously dedicated themselves to the feet of Prabhu. After sometime, Prabhu
with his followers went to take bath.
Here, the wives of Acarya quickly took their bath and started cooking for
Prabhu various items of food. They decorated the rice plate with scented rice
and other items. One wise disciple of Acarya offered food first to Salagrama
Candra and also to that Govardhana Sila given by Prabhu Nityananda to
Viracandra. The two Thakuranis decorated the rice plates for two Prabhus. After
the eating of Govardhana Sila and Sri Vansivadana, the priest offered the water
for washing mouth. Then he offered betel leaves to them. After that they went
to bed.
Here after coming back from the river, Viracandra and his followers took their
seats for eating by sitting in the courtyard of Gauranga. Prabhu Viracandra
told Sri Acarya to sit with him and to take food. Acarya Thakura said humbly,
"It is not fair to sit with you for eating for I want to eat after you all."
Hearing this, Prabhu caught Acarya's hand and said with a smile, "There is no
one to blame you if you sit by my side and take food with me." Acarya was
unable to violate Prabhu's request. Thus he sat with Prabhu Viracandra.
Everyone became charmed to observe the beauty of all the great Vaisnavas
sitting in a row. Banana leaves were placed before them and Prabhu ordered to
serve the food. Then wives of Acarya began to serve food. Sridasa, Gokulananda
and Vyasa decorated the plates filled with bowls full of delicious curries. All
of them with Viracandra ate most happily. After eating, they washed their mouths
and took betel leaves. Prabhu took rest a little and then spent the rest of day

[p.60]
and night in discussing about Krsna.
In the morning, Sri Viracandra with Acarya started for Khetari most gladly. All
of them reached Vudhuri via Kantakanagara. Govinda and others getting the news
of their coming, had been waiting on the path. Viracandra Prabhu with Acarya
and others met Govinda and others on the way. Govinda most gladly took them to
the house. Viracandra and Acarya became very pleased to get beautiful resting
places and delicious food. They stayed two days at Vudhuri. All the Vaisnavas
of that place came to meet Prabhu, Acarya and others. After taking bath in
Padmavati River, all of them crossed the river and most happily moved towards
Khetari.
On knowing the coming of Prabhu, Thakura Mahasaya ordered his cooks to prepare
various items of food. He collected different kinds of fruits and sweets. He
ordered his men to clean the houses. Then he with his men stood on the road and
waited for Prabhu. Prabhu with his followers appeared just like the million
moons to soothe the heat of the sun. Thakura Mahasaya advanced forward and bowed
to the feet of Viracandra. Prabhu embraced Narottama who could not hold his
tears and touched the feet of Prabhu again and again. Acarya Thakura and Sri
Thakura Mahasaya took Prabhu to the courtyard and temple of Gauranga. They
observed the images of Gauranga, Vallabhikanta, Sri Vrajamohana, Radhakrsna,
Radhakanta, Sri Radharamana. Viracandra could not control his tears after
observing the beautiful images. He fell on the ground again and again to bow to
the images. When he checked his emotion, the priest gave him the offered garland
of Prabhu. Acarya Thakura then very carefully took him to the house. The priest
also gave offered garlands to all the Vaisnavas who came with Viracandra. The
people of Khetari came to see Prabhu Viracandra. On their way back to their
houses, one said to another, "Nityananda is Balarama himself and Prabhu
Virabhadra is his son and is an abode of qualities. His beautiful feature can
increase the thirst of the eyes to see him again." Someone said, "We are very
fortunate to have the chance of seeing him most easily." Someone said, "All
these have become possible only due to Sri Thakura Mahasaya."
Here Viracandra took his seat with his followers in the beautiful house. Acarya
Thakura told very sweetly to Viracandra Prabhu, "Your food is ready because it
has been prepared before your coming to the house." Prabhu took out his
Govardhana Sila from his cloth bag and offered food before Him. After His
eating, he again put Him in his cloth bag. Then varieties of prasadam came from
the temple. Prabhu told Acarya, "Now I am hungry. So let us not waste time."
He with all his followers sat down to eat. Harirama, Ramakrsna, Ganganarayana,
Sri Govinda Cakravarti and others began to serve various items of food to
Viracandra and other Vaisnavas. Due to the superb taste of all items, Prabhu
and others ate too much. Then they washed their mouths. After that Acarya
Thakura with his followers began to discuss about Radhakrsna and Caitanya and
in this way they spent the whole day and night.
In the morning, Prabhu took his bath. Then Sri Santosa stood before Prabhu with
a beautiful cloth in his hand and requested Prabhu to wear it. He also offered
new clothes to all the Vaisnava followers of Prabhu. Prabhu then decorated his
Govardhana Sila with flowers, sandalpaste and Tulasi and offered food before
Him. Then he distributed the prasadam among all. After them Prabhu ate himself.
With the permission of Prabhu, Acarya and Thakura Mahasaya decided to start
sankirtana.
On hearing the announcement of sankirtana, people from every corner of Khetari
came running to throng all around the courtyard. In the afternoon, after
Viracandra's coming with his associates to the courtyard of Gauranga, the
Utthvapana arati ceremony took place. The priest gave him the garland and sadal
offerings. Acarya delightfully decorated Prabhu with sandalpaste and flower
garlands and began to weep in joy to observe the beauty of Prabhu. Thakura
Mahasaya with other singers and instrumentalists started sankirtana gladly.

[p.61]
Within a second the whole atmosphere changed into a divine-like feelings.
Devidasa started playing khola and kartala. Gokula started singing nectar-like
kirtana, the sound of which pierced the heaven. The voice of Sri Mahasaya led
to the ocean of happiness to overflow its bank. Viracandra amidst the group of
Vaisnavas began to shine like the sun. He in his beautiful feature began to
dance magnificiently with the music and kirtana. With raised hands he began to
utter "Haribola" very sweetly. His big deep eyes began to shed tears of joy.
His restless lotus-like fet began to move very beautifully. The gods began to
shower flowers upon the heads of the Vaisnavas. Prabhu Viracandra in the hope
of dancing with all of them, began to stare here and there. In the meantime, he
found that Sri Acarya with his follwers were dancing by his side. The earth
began to tremble by the feet steppings of the dancers. Gradually all of them
forgot their own entities and began to roar like lions.
Someone began to tremble out of trance. Someone began to hold the feet of
Viracandra. Someone began to roll on the ground out of ecstasy. Prabhu out of
ecstasy tightly embraced Narottama and did not let him go out of his embrace.
Sometimes he began to caress the face of Gokula. Sometimes he began to praise
Sri Govinda Kaviraja for his songs. Then he began to encourage Gokula to sing
more. Sri Gokula thus began to sing more beautifully the songs written by Sri
Govinda in a very expert manner. In this way midnight came. Then they stopped
sankirtana and took their seats in the courtyard of Gauranga.
In the morning all the Vaisnavas came to the house of Viracandra who requested
Ramacandra to sing the songs of Sri Rasa Vilasa. Ramacandra's voice was just
like nectar. His beautiful analysis of Bhagavatam highly pleased Viracandra.
Viracandra told Acarya, "I am afraid, can I meet you all again and have this
valuable company of yours?" Saying so, he began to weep. Acarya also began to
weep with him. Somehow they checked their emotions and then Sri Rupa Ghataka,
Ganganarayana, Syamadasa, Govinda and others brought fruit and sweets offerings
for Sri Govardhana Sila. Prabhu offered them to Him. After that he offered
betel leaves to Him and then put Him in a gold casket inside his cloth bag.
After observing the image of Sri Gauranga, they all took prasadam.
Prabhu then took some rest and after that he told Acarya, "I want to back to
Khardaha via Ekacakra. Tomorrow morning I have decided to start. You should go
with me for some distance." Acarya said, "Who will stand before your decision?
Do what you want to do." Prabhu Viracandra said with a smile, "I cannot turn
down your request. I have just tell you about my programme, now do what you
think better." Acarya told Narottama, "Tomorrow, Prabhu will leave Khetari with
me." Hearing this Thakura Mahasaya became very much perturbed and Acarya
pacified him. He ordered Santosa to make arrangements for Prabhu's going. He
ordered Thakura Kanai to pack the things what they would send with Prabhu. He
ordered Rupa Ghataka to pack the things what Acarya would carry. He sent
a messenger to Vudhuri very quickly and ordered his men to arrange a large
number of boats for Prabhu on the bank of Padmavati.
Next morning, Prabhu Viracandra with Acarya and others stood before Gauranga.
Then Prabhu returned to his house where many persons came to say farewell to
Prabhu. Prabhu then started for the bank of Padmavati. The disciples of Thakura
Mahasaya very humbly touched the feet of Prabhu Viracandra who blessed them
all. Viracandra consoled Thakura Mahasaya and Ramacandra Kaviraja in variuos
ways and took leave of them for some months. Acarya also consoled the villagers
of Khetari. Then he with Viracandra boarded on the boat. Ramacandra and others
also took another boat. The boatmen started the boats. The remaining Vaisnavas
along with Thakura Mahasaya who had been standing on the bank of Padmavati
started crying loudly. Viracandra with his followers reached Vudhuri by crosing
Padmavati.
With a clouded heart, Thakura Mahasaya returned to the temple of Gauranga. All

[p.62]
of them observed Gauranga, Vallabhikanta, Sri Vrajamohana, Radhakanta,
Radhakrsna and Sri Radharamana whose faces at once removed the clouds from
their minds. Thakura Mahasaya with others quickly took their baths and then ate
mahaprasadam. They spent that day in discussing about Krsna. But since that
day, Thakura Mahasaya became quite restless.
After a few days, Ramacandra came from Yajigrama. Thakura Mahasaya became very
glad to get back Ramacandra and became engaged in sankirtana for the days and
nights with Govinda and others in the courtyard of Gauranga. Even king Narasimha
and Canda Raya joined them in that wave of happiness. After a few days, Thakura
Mahasaya told his disciples, "For a long time you have not gone to your own
houses. This time pay a quick visit to your places." Though no one really wanted
to leave Thakura Mahsaya, yet being ordered by him, they had to start for their
houses. Only Ramacandra stayed with him.
One day, sitting in a lonely place, Thakura Mahasaya and Ramacandra discussed
something secret. Ramacandra Kaviraja after soetimes went to Yajigrama with
a perturbed mind. A message came from Yajigrama that Sri Acarya Thakura had
gone to Vrndavana with Ramacandra Kaviraja. Who could understand the mind of
those two?
One day Sri Mahasaya could not control his mind and began to lament for some
unprecedented happenings. He began to sing:
"The associates of Gauranga are Srinivasa, Gadadhara, Narahari, Mukunda,
Murari. Svarupa Damodara, Haridasa, Vakresvara are possessors of divine love.
The sports what they had performed could melt the stone, but how unforunate I
am for not able to witness them. I failed to be born at that time and remained
ignorant, how can I forget this sorrow? Prabhu Sanatana, Rupa, Raghunatha
Bhatta, Bhugarbha, Sri Jiva, Lokanatha, all these Prabhus did beautiful sports
in Vrndavana with other devotees. Now all of them have disapeared, leaving this
world empty, my eyes have become blind to whom I shall disclose my sorrow? Thus
I am living like an animal. Acarya Srinivasa to whom I got the refuge and whose
words used to cool my mind, he also has left me, and Ramacandra is absent, how
can I live without them? The sorrows which I am bearing in my mind, cannot be
told to others. So I have lost interest in my own life. The food I used to eat
is just like poison to me, yet I am still living. Then what is the value of
Narottama dasa?"
At that moment, the news came to him that Ramacandra Kaviraja had disappeared
from the world. Sri Thakura Mahasaya completely broke down and ran to a dense
forest. He began to cry loudly and lamented for Ramacandra. His voice became
chocked and he fell on the ground. King Narasimha, Rupanarayana, Sri Govinda,
Santosa could do nothing to pacify him. They could only cry along with Thakura
Mahasaya. Due to the wish of Prabhu, he pacified himself after a long time.
After 5-7 days, he decided to go for a bath in the Ganges. So some of his
disciples very carefully took him to Vudhuri and from there to Gamvila near the
bank of the Ganges. Suddenly he got tremendous temperature and he ordered his
disciples to prepare a pyre for him. Then he remained completely silent. His
disciples became completely at a loss. Ganganarayana pacified others. Many
brahmana panditas came to meet him but he did not speak to them. In this state,
he spent three days. He remained detached from the people. His disciples bathed
him in the Ganges and placed him on a celestial seat on the pyre. The brahmanas
began to jeer at Narottama by saying in this way, "This is the result of his
effort of making brahmanas, his disicples. Now Narottama is dying after losing
the power of speaking. Ganganarayana being a brahmana has become his disciple
after discarding the customs of a brahmana. Now he is witnessing the condition
of his religious master. We don't know what is expecting for him also."
In this way, they began to throw the arrows of words towards Ganganarayana.
Instead of being angry, Ganganarayana felt sorry for those heretics. He came
and stood before the pyre with folded hands and prayed to Narottama, "You had

[p.63]
saved many heretics before. This time these heretics being ignorant of your
power, are criticising you. Your disciples are feeling very sad to hear their
bad words. Please be favorable to them and save them from damnation."
On hearing the helpless utterances of Ganganarayana Mahasaya again came back
into sense. He got up on the pyre uttering "Radhakrsna Caitanya" and came out
of the pyre shinning like the sun. The people around him began to shout
Haribola. Suddenly the gods began to shower flowers on him.
The now-believer brahmanas watching everything from distance became horrified.
They began to repent for their evil mentality. With tears in their eyes, they
fell on the feet of Ganganarayana and asked for mercy. Being moved by their
prayers, Ganganarayana went to Mahasaya and requested him to forgive those
brahmanas. The brahmanas then fell on the feet of Narottama and completely
surrendered themselves after confessing all their sins. Thakura Mahasaya became
so moved that he at once embraced them and empowered them with devotion. He
ordered them to study devotional books to Ganganarayana.
He then told everybody, "After few days I shall go to Khetari and you all
should go with me. Today I shall go to Vudhuri." Saying so he quickly took bath
in the Ganges. This incident spread all over the country. From the bank of the
Ganges, Mahasaya with others went to the house of Ganganarayana. There they ate
prasadam. Then he started for Vudhuri very gladly. He went back to Khetari with
Sri Govinda, Kaviraja, Karnapura, Kaviraja Gokula, Valabhi Majumdar and others
and remained engaged on the topics of Krsna. Narottama used to serve the
Prabhus all the time. Sometimes he used to roll in the dust of the courtyard of
Gauranga and used to pray to the Prabhu in this way, "Oh Lord Gauranga, Vallabhi
Kanta Krsna, be merciful to me like a materialist. Oh Lord, Radhakanta, Sri
Vrajamohana, let me get rid of the agonies of this material world. Oh Lord
Radharamana, let me lie under your feet and do help me to remember you in this
life and life after death." In this way, he used to lament everyday.
In order to avoid crowd, he used to enter into the dense forest and cry out
loudly, "Oh Lord Gauranga Sundara, the moon of Navadvipa, oh Lord Nityananda,
son of Padmavati, oh Lord Advaita, the husband of Sita, oh Lord Sri Pandita
Gadadhara, the abode of love, oh Lord, Pandita Srivasa, the ocean of mercy, oh
lords Vakresvara, Sri Murari, Haridasa, Sri Svarupa, Ramananda, Damodara, Sri
Acarya Gopinatha, Kasisvara, oh lords Vacaspati, Sarvabhauma Bhattacarya, oh
lords Suryadasa, Gauridasa, oh Sri Pandita Jagadisa Suklamvara, oh Sri Govinda
Ghosa, Dasa Gadadhara, oh Pundarika Vidyanidhi Mahasaya, Mukunda, Madhava, Vasu
Ghosa, Dhananjaya, oh Sri Jagadananda, Sankara, Sridhara, oh Sri Mukunda,
Narahari, oh Sri Rupa, Sanatana, Sri Bhugarbha, Lokanatha, oh Sri Gopala Bhatta,
Raghunatha Bhatta, oh Svarupa Raghunatha, the dwellers of Sri Kunda, oh Sri Jiva
Gosvami and oh the devotees of Gaura Nityananda, be merciful to me, I am at your
feet. Don't neglect me because I am a sinner. Please fulfill my desires."
With these prayers his eyes began to shed continuous tears. He began to roll on
the ground. He began to pray to Sri Govinda, Gopinatha, Madanamohana, Radha
Damodara, Sri Radharamana, Radhavinoda and the Queen of Vrndavana. He also
prayed to Lalita, Visakha, Sucitra, Sri Campakalatika, Rangadevi, Sudevi,
Tungavidya, Indulekha, Sri Rupamanjari, Ratimanjari, Kasturi, Lavangamanjari,
Manjulali to help him to stay under the feet of Radharani.
He prayed to Sri Radha, "Oh Sri Radharani, Krsna is yours, you are always
engaged in His service. Please give me the chance of worshipping You both.
I want to place you on a jewelled throne and I shall fan you at that time.
Being directed by the sakhis, I shall offer betel leaves to your moon-like
mouths. Will any desires be fulfilled?"
Saying so, he sighed. Then he tried to remember the sports of Gauranga with his
asociates in Nadia. Observing the restless state of mind of Thakura Mahasaya,
Sri Radhavallabha became very anxious. Sometimes Thakura Mahasaya used to

[p.64]
console his dear disciples and used to concentrate them in sankirtana. One day
he asked his disciples about the delay of Ganganarayana in coming to Khetari.
In the meantime, Ramakrsna and Ganganarayana came with those brahmanas. All of
them bowed to the feet of Thakura Mahasaya and expressed their desires of being
initiated by Thakura Mahasaya. Thakura Mahasaya became glad. He intitiated some
of them and some of them got initiation from Ganganarayana. After that, all of
them went to the courtyard of Gauranga. The priest gave them offered garlands.
Sri Govinda Kaviraja and others became satisfied to observe the sincere efforts
of the brahmanas. Sri Sankara Bhattacarya and other brahmanas very humbly bowed
to the feet of the Vaisnavas.
On the next day, a great festival took place. The brahmanas became mad in
sankirtana. One day, Mahasaya in the morning, began to shed tears helplessly
with fire-like sighs. He laid down on the ground for sometime and his lotus
face became dry. He with a chocked voice, began to lament in this way, "How
cruel is the providence to me, where Srinivasa has gone after giving me so much
pain? I had Ramacandra but he also had left me and I cannot hear a word from
him any longer. Can I have him again in my life, my life has become futile.
Svarupa, Rupa, Sanatana, Raghunatha, the merciful, and the Bhattas, be kind to
me. Acarya Srinivasa whose servant is Ramacandra, can I have them again? Without
observing their faces my heart is getting pierced, just like a doe pierced by
poisonous arrow. I kept some jewels hidden under my cloth, who has stolen them
why Narottama is suffering so much misery?"
Saying so, he kept mum and everyone became aware of some unforeseen incidents.
On knowing the state of mind of his dear disciples, Mahasaya consoled them all.
Thakura Mahasaya came to the courtyard of Gauranga and dedicated himself once
again to the feet of Prabhu. He started for Vudhuri with Govinda and others. He
stayed one day at Vudhuri and Sri Govinda Cakravarti and others came to meet
him. After talking very sweetly with them, Mahasaya spent the day and night in
sankirtana. From Vudhuri, he quickly moved to Gamvila.
After taking bath in the Ganges, he sat in the water and ordered Ramakrsna and
Ganganarayana to massage his body. But there was no chance of massaging his
body because only the touch of their hands, Thakura Mahasaya's body melted like
milk and vanished in the Ganges. Suddenly the river became turbulent. Everyone
became puzzled at this. The gods began to shower flowers from the heaven on
seeing this type of disappearance. The cry of Hari Hari filled the air. The
disciples of Sri Mahasaya went to the house of Ganganarayana and very patiently
they kept themselves calm and quiet. Sri Govinda Kaviraja and others quickly
arranged for a funeral ceremony at Gamvila. Then they went hastily to Khetari
via Vudhuri. There king Narasimha, Rupanarayana, Krsnasimha, Canda Raya, Sri
Gopiramana, Sri Govinda, King Santosa and others started preparations for
a great festival.
Due to the fear of exaggeration, I restrain myself from describing the festival
in toto but when they started sankirtana in the courtyard of Gauranga, within
a short time, Devidasa, Gauranga, Gokula, Sri Govinda Kaviraja and others forgot
their own entities. They began to roll of the ground. They began to roar like
lions and they began to soak the ground with their tears. Suddenly due to the
favor of guru, Krsna and Vaisnavas, everyone witnessed Narottama dancing with
them. When he vanished everyone lost their patience. So Narotatma again appeared
and consoled them all. Who can realise the qualities of Thakura Mahasaya?
So to get his favor, be attentive to Narottama Vilasa, narrating by Narahari.

[p.65]
THE TWELFTH VILASA
All glories to Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu, Nityananda Prabhu, Advaita Acarya and
their associates. Please be kind to this poor soul. All glories to the merciful
listeners.
Who could possibly describe all the wonderful disciples of Sri Thakura Mahasaya?
Although I am unqualified and ignorant, I shall try to describe some of the
branches and twigs who descended from the tree of Sri Narottama dasa Thakura.
Please forgive my frailties and bestow your mercy upon me as I am always at your
service.
All glories to the disciples of Sri Mahasaya. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu,
Nityananda and Advaita are their very life. Glory to Sri Pujari Balarama who
satisfied the Lord by his intense devotion. Glory to Cakravarti Sri Gopiramana
to whom Gauracandra and his associates are the life. Glory to Sri Acarya
Ramakrsna, the mine of qualities whose branches and twigs covered the whole
world. Glory to Sri Pujari Ravi Raya who derived immense pleasure from simply
serving the Vaisnavas. All glories to Cakravarti Ganganarayana who also has
many disciples. Glory to Radhavallabha Caudhuri who bound Sri Thakura Mahasaya
by his love. Ramakanta is the elder brother of Sri Mahasaya and Sri
Radhavallabha is the son of Ramakanta. Glory to Sri Ghosa whose songs charmed
Sri Thakura Mahasaya. Glory to Krsna Sinha who is better known as Sinha Vikrama.
He is always mad with love, and is an expert musician. Glory to Sri Santosa Raya
whose service charmed Sri Thakura Mahasaya. Narottama Thakura is very
affectionate towards Sri Govinda Kaviraja who expressed his realizations through
his songs. Being requested by Santosa, Kaviraja gladly wrote a drama named
Sangita Madhava. Glory to King Sri Govindarama whose tongue used to chant
Harinama incessantly. Glory to Sri Vinoda Raya who used to dance madly in
sankirtana. Glory to Phagu Caudhuri, a great scholar whose songs could even
charm the Gandharvas. Glory to the great scholar Sri Casanta Raya who is always
absorbed in the pastimes of Krsna Caitanya. Glory to Sri Sitala Raya whose calm
disposition always charms the Vaisnavas. Glory to Prabhu Ramadatta whose eyes
always shed tears of love. Glory to apathetic Dharmadasa Caudhuri who practises
firm belief in the Vaisnavas. Glory to Nityanandadasa who is mad in love for
Prabhu Nityananda. Glory to Candidasa, an abode of good qualities, who is kind
to the wicked and poor. Glory to Dhiru Caudhuri whose qualities used to make
the animals and birds cry. Glory to Vonka Ramabhadra, a very humourous person.
Glory to the friend of the poor, Ramabhadra Raya. Glory to Rupanarayana whose
songs used to melt everyone's heart. Glory to Janakivallabha Caudhuri Thakura.
Glory to Sri Srimanta Datta Bhandari Glory to Rupanarayana Pujari Thakura.
Glory to apathetic Vaisnava Carana. Glory to broadminded Sivarama dasa. Glory
to Krsnadasa Vairagi Thakura. Glory to king Narasimha. Glory to Queen Rupamala.
Glory to Canda Raya. Glory to Narayana Raya. Glory to Ramacandra Raya. Glory to
the kirtana singer Devidasa whose songs madden the Vaisnavas. Glory to
Radhakrsna Bhattacarya of Navadvipa. Glory to wise Sri Thakura Krsnadasa. Glory
to Catna Ramadasa. Glory to Sankara Visvasa. Glory to the great singer Gandharva
Raya. Glory to Madana Raya, son of Gandharva Raya. Glory to Gangadasa Raya.
Glory to the instrumentalist Gauranga dasa whose mrdanga playing removes
the agony of everyone. Glory to Sri Acarya Jayakrsna. Glory to Varu
Caitanyadasa. Glory to Vraja Raya. Glory to Radhakrsna dasa. Glory to Krsna
Raya. Glory to Thakura Sri Dayarama dasa. Glory to Sri Purusottama. Glory to
the great singer Gokula dasa. Glory to Haridasa whose only desire is to live in
Navadvipa. Glory, glory to Ganga Haridasa. Glory to Sri Thakura Haridasa. Glory
to Sri Jagata Raya. Glory to the singer Rupa Raya. Glory to Dhiru Caudhuri.
Glory to Sri Kanta. Glory to Sri Mathura dasa. Glory to Sri Bhagavata dasa.
Glory to Jagadisa Raya. Glory to Thakura Sri Mahesa Caudhuri. Glory to Ganesa
Caudhuri. Glory to Candrasekhara. Glory to Sri Govinda Raya. Glory to Narottama
a Majumdara. Glory to Sri Sri Sankara Bhattacarya. Glory to Sri Gosvami dasa.
Glory to Sri Murari dasa. Glory to Sri Vasanta Datta. Glory to Thakura Sri

[p.66]
Syama dasa. Glory to Sri Jayagopala Datta. Glory to Ramadeva Datta. Glory to
Gangadasa Datta. Glory to Manohara Ghosa. Glory to Sri Mukuta Maitra. Glory to
Sri Manohara Visvasa. Glory to Sri Arjuna Visvasa. Glory to Sri Govardhana
Bhandari. All glories to Sri Valakadasa Vairagi Thakura, Sri Gaurangadasa
Vairagi, Sri Viharidasa Vairagi Thakura, Sri Gokuldasa Vairagi, Sri Prasada dasa
Vairagi. There is no limit in describing the qualities of all these Vaisnavas.
Their fame spread all over the world. I desire to worship them and sing their
glories without any attraction towards material pleasure.
Now I give further description of the branches and twigs of Narottama dasa
Thakura. Ramakrsna Acarya has a big branch having many disciples. Kanakalatika
is the wife of Sri Acarya. She is a devoted wife and a great devotee of Krsna.
Radhakrsnacarya, the eldest son of Acarya died at an early age. Radhakrsna
Cakravarti of Vetula is a great devotee. Sri Svarupa Cakravarti of Husanapura
is a sincere servant of Sri Govinda. Sri Gopala Cakravarti of Kumarapura whose
topic is on everyone's lips. There is no limit of the branches and twigs to whom
Sri Krsna Caitanya is the life.
Ganganarayana is the branch of Sri Thakura Mahasaya. Ganganarayana got the
title of Sri Thakura Cakravarti. Everyone used to sing his glory even today in
Vrndavana. He has many branches and twigs of disciples. Narahari, wife of Sri
Cakravarti is the mother of Visnupriya. Krsnapriya, daughter of Visnupriya is
favored by Sri Radharani of Sri Radha Kunda. Sri Krsna Carana Cakravarti is the
youngest son of Ramakrsna Acarya. How can I sing the glory of Sri Krsnacarana.
I am trying to present a brief account of his branches and twigs. Rama Krsna
and Ganganarayana are the same entity. Sri Thakura Cakravarti has no son. Acarya
realising his desire, favored Ganganarayana by giving a son. And that son is
Sri Krsnacarana, son of Sri Acarya. Sri Krsnacarana became a great scholar in
a short time. Sri Madhusudana Cakravarti is another branch to whom Ganganarayana
is the life. Raghudeva Cakravarti is a great devotee of Sri Cakravarti Thakura.
I restrain myself from narrating all the branches and twigs of Sri Cakravarti
Thakura. The branches of Sri Mahasaya's disciples are all abodes of exemplary
qualities who were always absorbed in the joy of sankirtana. I have no capacity
to descibe the transcendental pastimes of Sri Thakura Mahasaya, therefore I am
fully dependent on the mercy of the Vaisnava Gosvamis.
Thus listen attentively to the narration of Narottama Vilasa by Narahari.